

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
TATA McGRAW-HILL 
EDITION 
' 
mance 
and design 
John D. Anderson, Jr 

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
lffll Tata McGraw-Hill 
AIRCRAFT PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN 
Copyright© 1999 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by 
any·means, or stored in a data base or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher 
Tata McGraw-Hill Edition 2010 
Fifth reprint 2012 
RCAYYRZHRQDCZ 
Reprinted in India by arrangement with The McGraw-HiU,CQmpanies, Inc., New York 
'" ,V,' • 
.; i' 
Sales territories: India,. Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sril~a~a and Bhutan 
·:;.,,.. . ,J/ . 
'.,,,.1t.f \./· 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Anderson, John David 
Aircraft performance and design I John D. Anderson, Jr. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-07-001971-1 
1. Airplanes~Performance. 2. Airplanes~Design and construction. 
I. Title. 
TL671.4.A528 1999 
629.134' J-dc2 J 98-48481 
ISBN-13: 978-0-07-070245-5 
ISBN-10: 0-07-070245-4 
CIP 
Published by Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, 
7 West Patel Nagar, New Delhi 110 008, and printed at 
Nice Printing Press, Delhi I 10 051 
. ~1 '11« s 
The Mc6raw·H11/ ComP_ames <:, @! *K!ID 

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
AIRCRAFT PERFORMANCE 
AND DESIGN 

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
To Sarah~Allen, Katherine, and Elizabeth 
for all their love and understanding 
John D. Anderson, Jr. 

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
John D. Anderson, Jr., was born in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, on October 1, 1937. He 
attended the University of Florida, graduating in 1959 with high honors and a Bache­
lor of Aeronautical Engineering Degree. From 1959 to 1962, he was a lieutenant and 
task scientist at the Aerospace Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force 
Base. From 1962 to 1966, he attended the Ohio State University under the National 
Science Foundation and NASA Fellowships, graduating with a Ph.D. in aeronautical 
and astronautical engineering. In 1966, he joined the U.S. Naval Ordnance Lab­
oratory as Chief of the Hypersonic Group. In 1973, he became Chairman of the 
Department of Aerospace Engineering at the University of Maryland, and since 1980 
has been professor of Aerospace Engineering at Maryland. In 1982, he was desig­
nated a Distinguished Scholarffeacher by the University. During 1986-1987, while 
on sabbatical from the university, Dr. Anderson occupied the Charles Lindbergh chair 
at the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. He continues 
with the Museum in a part-time appointment as special assistant for aerodynamics. 
In addition to his appointment in aerospace engineering, in 1993 he was elected to 
the faculty of the Committee on the History and Philosophy of Science at Maryland, 
and is an affiliate faculty member in the Department of History. 
Dr. Anderson has published seven books: Gasdynamic Lasers: An Introduc­
tion, Academic Press (1976), A History of Aerodynamics and Its Impact on Flying 
Machines, Cambridge University Press (1997), and with McGraw-Hill, Introduction 
to Flight, 3d edition (1989), Modem Compressible Flow, 2d Edition (1990), Fun­
damentals of Aerodynamics, 2d edition (1991), Hypersonic and High Temperature 
Gas Dynamics (1989), and Computational Fluid Dynamics: The Basics with Ap­
plications (1995). He is the author of over 120 papers on radiative gasdynamics, 
re-entry aerothermodynamics, gas dynamic and chemical lasers, computational fluid 
dynamics, applied aerodynamics, hypersonic flow, and the history of aerodynamics. 
Dr. Anderson is in Who's Who in America, and is a Fellow of the American Insti­
tute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA). He is also a Fellow of the Washington 
Academy of Sciences, and a member of Tau Beta Pi, Sigma Tau, Phi Kappa Phi, Phi 
Eta Sigma, The American Society for Engineeri~g Education (ASEE), The Society 
for the History of Technology, and the History of Science Society. He has received 
the Lee Atwood Award for excellence in Aerospace Engineering Education from 
the AIAA and the ASEE, and the Pendray Award for Aerospace Literature from the 
AIAA. 
vii 

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
PREFACE 
There are a number of books on airplane performance, and a number of books on airplane design. 
Question: Where does the present book fit into the scheme of things? Answer: Overlapping and 
integrating both subjects. On one hand, this book gives a presentation of airplane performance 
at the college level. It covers both static and accelerated performance topics. On the other hand, 
this book also gives a presentation of airplane design, with an emphasis on the philosophy and 
methodology of design. Some emphasis is also placed on historical material and design case 
studies in order to illustrate this philosophy and methodology. 
This book is not a handbook for airplane design. It is intended to be used in courses in 
airplane performance as a main text, and in courses in airplane design as an introduction to 
the philosophy of design, and hence in conjunction with an existing detailed text on airplane 
design. To paraphrase a popular television commercial, this book is not intended to make a 
course in handbook engineering design-rather it is intended to make a course in handbook 
engineering design better. This author hopes that such intentions are indeed achieved in the 
present book. 
The major features of this book are as follows. 
1. · This book is unique in that it is the first to provide an integrated introductory treatment 
of both aircraft performance and aircraft design-two subjects that are so closely connected 
that they can be viewed as technological Siamese twins. 
2. This book is intentionally written in a conversational style, much like the author's 
previous texts, in order to enhance the readers' understanding and enjoyment. 
3. The book is divided into three parts. Part I contains introductory material that is 
important for an understanding of aircraft performance and design. Chapter l deals with the 
history of aircraft design. It is important for students and practitioners of aircraft design to 
understand this history because the design of a new airplane is usually evolutionary; a new 
airplane is frequently an evolutionary extension of one or more previous designs. Even the 
most revolutionary of new airplane designs contain some of the genes of almost all previous 
aircraft. Hence, Chapter l is an essential part of this book. Other historical notes appear 
elsewhere in the book. Chapters 2 and 3 are overviews of aerodynamics and propulsion, 
respectively. These chapters focus on only those aspects of aerodynamics and propulsion that 
are necessary for an understanding and application of both aircraft performance (Part H) and 
aircraft design (Part III). However, they serve a secondary function; they provide a 
self-contained overview of theoretical and applied aspects of aerodynamics and propulsion 
that help the reader obtain a broader perspective of these subjects. So Chapters 2 and 3, in 
addition to being essential to the material in Parts II and III, have intrinsic educational value 
in and of themselves, no matter what may be the reader's background. 
4. Part II deals with static and accelerated aircraft performance. The basic equations of 
motion are derived in Chapter 4. These equations are then specialized for the study of static 
performance (no acceleration) in Chapter 5, and are used in Chapter 6 in their more general 
form for performance problems involving acceleration. The material is presented in two 
parallel tracks: (1) graphical solutions, and (2) closed-form analytical solutions. The value of 
each approach is emphasized. 
ix 

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
X Preface 
5. Parts I and II provide the material for a complete one-semester course on aircraft 
performance at the junior-senior level. 
6. Parts I and II are sprinkled with "design cameos"-boxed discussions of how the 
material being discussed at that stage is relevant to aircraft design. These design cameos are a 
unique feature of the present book. They are part of the overall integrated discussion of 
performance and design that is a hallmark of this book. Irt addition, many worked examples 
are included in Parts I and II as a means to support and enhance the reader's understanding of 
and comfort level with the material. Homework problems are included at the end of most of 
the chapters, as appropriate to the nature of each chapter. 
7. Part III is all about aircraft design, but with a different style and purpose than existing 
airplane design texts. Chapter 7 lays out an intellectual, almost philosophical road map for 
the process of aircraft design. Then the methodology is applied to the design of a 
propeller-driven airplane in Chapter 8, and jet-propelled airplanes in Chapter 9. In addition, 
Chapters 8 and 9 are enhanced by important case histories of the design of several historic 
airplanes~another dose of history, but with a powerful purpose, namely to drive home the 
philosophy and methodology of aircraft design. Part III is not a design handbook; rather, it 
provides an intellectual perspective on design-a perspective that all airplane designers, past 
and present, exhibit, whether knowingly or subconsciously. Part III is intended for the first 
part of a senior design course. The complete book-Parts I, II, and III-is intended to 
provide a unique "pre-design" experience for the reader. I wanted to create a book that would 
work synergistically with existing main-line design texts. As mentioned earlier, this book is 
not intended to constitute a complete course in aircraft design; rather, its purpose is to make 
such 'a course a better and more rewarding experience for the student. 
8. Although "history" is not in the title of this book, another unique aspect is the extensive 
discussions of the history of airplane design in Chapter 1 and the extensively researched 
historical case studies presented in chapter~ 8 and 9. In this vein, the present book carries 
_over some of the tradition and historical flavor of the author's previous books, in particular 
some of the historical research contained in the author's recent book, The History of 
Aerodynamics, and Its Impact on,Flying Machines (see Reference 8). 
9. There are carefully selected homework problems at the end of most of the chapters-not 
an overpowering number, but enough to properly reinforce the material in the chapter. There 
is a Solutions Manual for the use of instructors. Permission is granted to copy and distribute 
these solutions to students at the discretion of the instructor. In addition, the answers to 
selected problems are given at the end of the book. 
10. Computer software for aircraft performance and design calculations is intentionally not 
provided with this book. This may be 
seen as bucking current trends with engineering 
textbooks. But I want this book to provide a comfortable intellectual experience for the 
reader, unencumbered by the need to learn how to u~e someone else's software. The reader's 
experience with software for these subjects will most likely come soon enough in the 
classroom. However, much of the material in this book is ideally suited to the creation of 
simple computer programs, and the reader should enjoy the creative experience of writing 
such programs as he or she wishes. 
I wish to acknowledge the author Enzo Angelucci and his wonderful book Airplanes From 
the Dawn of Flight to the Present Day, published in English by McGraw-Hill in 1973. The 
airplane drawings that appear in Chapter 1 of the present book are taken from his book. 
I wish to thank the many colleagues who have provided stimulating discussions during 
the time that this book was being prepared, as well as the reviewers of the manuscript. I also 

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
Preface 
thank Sue Cunningham, who has provided some expert word processing for the manuscript. 
And most of all I thank Sarah-Allen Anderson for being such a supportive and understanding 
wife during the long time it has taken me to finish this project. 
So here it is-this integrated treatment of aircraft performance and design. Try it on for 
size. I hope that it fits comfortably and serves you well. If it does, then all my labors will not 
have been in vain. 
John D. Anderson, Jr. 
September 1998 
xi 

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
CONTENTS 
Preface 1x 
PART 1 
Preliminary Considerations 1 
Chapter 
The Evolution of the Airplane and Its 
Performance: A Short History 3 
1.1 Introduction 3 
1.2 Four Historical Periods of Airplane Design 
Characteristics 6 
1.2.1 Pre- Wright Era 6 
1.2.2 Era of Strut-and-Wire Biplanes 15 
1.2.3 Era of the Mature, Propeller-Driven 
Airplane 23 
1.2.4 Era of the Jet-Propelled Airplane 33 
1.3 Unconventional Designs (Innovative 
Concepts) 43 
1.4 Summary and the Future 47 
Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The 
Drag Polar 51 
2.1 Introduction 51 
2.2 The Source of Aerodynamic Force 52 
2.3 Aerodynamic Lift, Drag, and Moments 53 
2.4 Aerodynamic Coefficients 57 
2.5 Lift, Drag, and Moment Coefficients: How 
They Vary 62 
2.6 The Aerodynamic Center 70 
2.7 NACA Airfoil Nomenclature 73 
2.8 Lift and Drag Buildup 78 
2.8.1 Lift for a Finite Wing 78 
2.8.2 
2.8.3 
Wing-Body Combinations 103 
Drag 105 
2.8.4 Summary 124 
2.9 The Drag Polar 126 
2.9.l More Thoughts on Drag 126 
2.9.2 The Drag Polar: What Is It and How Is 
It Used? 129 
2.10 Historical Note: The Origin of the Drag 
Polar-,Lilienthal and Eiffel 137 
2.11 Summary 141 
Some Propulsion Characteristics 145 
3.1 Introduction 145 
3.2 Thrust and Efficiency-The Tradeoff 146 
3.3 The Reciprocating Engine/Propeller 
Combin:ation 151 
3.3.l Variations of Power and Specific Fuel 
Consumption with Velocity and 
Altitude 154 
3.3.2 The Propeller 156 
3.4 The Turbojet Engine 162 
3.4.1 Variations of Thrust and Specific Fuel 
Consumption with Velocity and 
Altitude 166 
3.5 The Turbofan Engine 170 
3.5.1 Variations of Thrust and Specific Fuel 
Consumption with Velocity and 
Altitude 174 
3.6 The Turboprop 178 
3.6. l Variations of Power and Specific Fuel 
Consumption with Velocity and 
Altitude 181 
3.7 Miscellaneous Comments: Afterbuming and 
More on Specific Fuel Consumption 183 
3.8 Summary 185 

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
xiv Contents 
PA.RT 2 
Airplane Performance 189 
Chapter 4 
The Equations of Motion 191 
4.1 Introduction 191 
4.2 The Four Forces of Flight 192 
4.3 The Equations of Motion 194 
4.4 Summary and Comments 197 
Chapter 5 
Airplane Performance: Steady 
Flight 199 
5 .1 Introduction 199 
5 .2 Equations of Motion for Steady, Level 
Flight 201 
5.3 Thrust Required (Drag) 202 
5.3.1 Graphical Approach 202 
5.3.2 Analytical Approach 208 
5.3.3 Graphical and Analytical Approaches: 
Some Comments 216 
5.4 The Fundamental Parameters: 
Thrust-to-Weight Ratio, Wing Loading, 
Drag Polar, and Lift-to-Drag Ratio 216 
5 .4.1 Aerodynamic Relations Associated 
with Maximum CLf C0 , cf12 /Co, and 
ct/co 218 
5.5 Thrust Available and the Maximum Velocity 
of the Airplane 226 
5.5.1 Propeller-Driven Aircraft 227 
5.5.2 Jet-Propelled Aircraft 229 
5.5.3 Maximum Velocity 230 
5.6 Power Required 234 
5.6. l Graphical Approach 235 
5.6.2 Analytical Approach 236 
5.7 Power Available and Maximum Velocity 239 
5.7.l Propeller-Driven Aircraft 239 
5.7.2 Turbojet and Turbofan Engines 241 
5.7.3 Maximum Velocity 242 
5.8 Effect of Drag Divergence on Maximum 
Velocity 244 
5.9 Minimum Velocity: Stall and High-Lift 
Devices 252 
5.9. l · Calculation of Stalling Velocity: Role 
of(Cdmax 253 
5.9.2 The Nature of Stall-Flow 
Separation 255 
5.9.3 High-Lift Devices 257 
5.9.4 Interim Summary 263 
5.10 Rate of Climb 265 
5 .10.1 Graphical Approach 268 
5.10.2 Analytical Approach 270 
5.10.3 Gliding (Unpowered) Flight 282 
5.11 Service and Absolute Ceilings 287 
5.12 Time to Climb 290 
5.12.1 Graphical Approach 290 
5.12.2 Analytical Approach 292 
5.13 Range 293 
5.13.l Range for Propeller-Driven 
Airplanes 296 
5.13.2 Range for Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
5.13.3 Other Considerations 299 
5.14 Endurance 302 
5.14.1 Endurance for Propeller-Driven 
Airplanes 303 
5.14.2 Endurance for Jet-Propelled 
Airplanes 305 
5.15 Range and Endurance: A Summary and 
Some General Thoughts 305 
5.15.1 More on Endurance 306 
5.15.2 More on Range 308 
5.15.3 Graphical Summary 309 
5 .15 .4 The Effect of Wind 309 
5.16 Summary 314 
Chapter 6 
Airplane Performance: Accelerated 
Flight 321 
6.1 Introduction 321 
6.2 Level Tum 322 
6.2.l Minimum Tum Radius 329 
6.2.2 Maximum Turn Rate 332 
6.3 The Pull-up and Pulldown Maneuvers 
297 
336 
6.4 Limiting Case for Large Load Factor 339 
6.5 The V-n Diagram 341 

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
6.6 Energy Concepts: Accelerated Rate of 
Climb 344 
6.7 Takeoff Performance 353 
6. 7 .1 Calculation of Ground Roll 355 
6.7.2 Calcuiation of Distance While Airborne 
to Clear an Obstacle 363 
6.8 Landing Performance 367 
6.8. l Calculation of Approach Distance 368 
6.8.2 Calculation of Flare Distance 370 
6.8.3 Calculation of Ground Roll 370 
6.9 Summary 375 
PART 3 
Airplane Design 
Chapter 7 
The Philosophy of Airplane 
Design 381 
7.1 Introduction 38] 
7.2 Phases of Airplane Design 382 
7 .2. l Conceptual Design 382 
7.2.2 Design 383 
7.2.3 Detail Design 386 
7.2.4 Interim Summary 386 
7.3 The Seven Intellectual Pivot Points for 
Conceptual Design 387 
7 .3. l Requirements 388 
7.3.2 Weight of the Airplane-First 
Estimate 389 
7.3.3 
7.3.4 
7.3.5 
7.3.6 
7.3.7 
7.3.8 
7.3.9 
Critical Performance Parameters 
Configuration Layout 391 
Better Weight Estimate 39 I 
Performance Analysis 391 
Optimization 392 
Constraint Diagram 392 
Interim Summary 395 
Design of a Propeller-Driven 
397 
8.1 Introduction 397 
391 
Contents 
8.2 Requirements 398 
8.3 The Weight of an Airplane and Its First 
Estimate 398 
8.3. l Estimation of W,/ W0 399 
8.3.2 Estimation of W0 400 
8.3.3 Calculation of W0 405 
8.4 Estimation of the Critical Performance 
Parameters 406 
8.4. l Maximum Lift Coefficient 406 
8.4.2 WingLoadingW/S 410 
8.4.3 Thrust-to-Weight Ratio 4 J 2 
8.5 Summary of the Critical Performance 
Parameters 419 
8.6 Configuration Layout 419 
8.6.1 Overall Type of Configuration 420 
8.6.2 Wing Configuration 420 
8.6.3 
8.6.4 
Fuselage Configuration 431 
Center-of-Gravity Location: First 
Estimate 433 
8.6.5 Horizontal and Vertical Tail Size 435 
8.6.6 Propeller Size 440 
8.6.7 Gear, and Wing Placement 442 
8.6.8 The Resulting Layout 448 
8.7 A Better Weight Estimate 449 
8.8 Performance Analysis 453 
8.8. l Power Required and Power Available 
Curves 453 
8.8.2 Rate of Climb 455 
8.8.3 Range 455 
8.8.4 Stalling Speed 456 
8.8.5 Landing Distance 456 
8.8.6 Takeoff Distance 457 
8.8.7 Interim Summary 458 
8.9 Summary 458 
8.10 Design Case Study: The Wright Flyer 458 
8.11 Design Case Study: The Douglas DC-3 463 
of Jet-Propelled 
Airplanes 
9.1 Introduction 488 
9.2 The Design of Subsonicffransonic 
Jet-Fropelled Airplanes: A Case Study of 
the 707 and 727 489 

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
xvi 
9.3 
9.4 
9.5 
Contents 
9.2.1 Design of the B-47-A Precursor to the 
707 489 
9.2.2 Design of the 707 Civil Jet 
Transport 494 
9.2.3 Design of the Boeing 727 Jet 
Transport 500 
9.2.4 Interim Summary 513 
Subsonic Jet Airplane Design: Additional 
Considerations 516 
Supersonic Airplane Design 519 
9.4.1 Design of the F-16 519 
9.4.2 Design of the SR-71 Blackbird 527 
9.4.3 Design of the Lockheed F-22 Advanced 
Tactical Fighter -538 
Summary 542 
Postface 543 
Appendix A 
Standard Atmosphere, SI Units 545 
Appendix B 
Standard Atmosphere, English 
Engineering Units 557 
Answers to Selected Problems 567 
References 569 
Index 573 

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
AIRCRAFT PERFORMANCE 
AND DESIGN 

===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
PART 
1 
PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS 
Part 1 consists of three chapters which set the stage for our subsequent discussion of 
airplane performance and design. Chapter 1 is a short history of the evolution of the 
airplane and its design; its purpose is to set the proper philosophical perspective for 
the material in this book. Chapters 2 and 3 cover aspects of applied aerodynamics 
and propuls~on, respectively, insofar as they directly relate to the performance and 
design considerations to be discussed in the remainder of this book. 

===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
1 
The Evolution of the Airplane and Its 
Performance: A Short History 
Instead of a palette of colors, the aeronautical engineer has his own artist's palette 
of options. How he mixes these engineering options on his technological palette 
and applies them to his canvas ( design) determines the performance of his airplane. 
When the synthesis is best it yields synergism, a result that is dramatically greater 
than the sum of its parts. This is hailed as "innovation." Failing this, there will result a 
mediocre airplane that may be good enough, or perhaps an airplane of lovely external 
appearance, but otherwise an iron peacock that everyone wants to forget. 
1. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Richard Smith, Aeronautical Historian 
From Milestones of Aviation, 
National Air and Space Museum, 1989 
The next time you are outside on a clear day, look up. With some likelihood, you will 
see evidence of an airplane-possibly a small, private aircraft hanging low in the sky, 
slowly making its way to some nearby destination (such as the Cessna 172 shown 
in Fig. 1.1 ), or maybe a distinct white contrail high in the sky produced by a fast jet 
transport on its way from one end of the continent to the other (such as the Boeing 
777 shown in Fig. 1.2). These airplanes-these flying machines-we take for granted 
today. The airplane is a part of everyday life, whether we simply see one, fly in one, 
or receive someone or something (package, letter, etc.) that was delivered by one. 
The invention and development of the airplane are arguably one of the three most 
important technical developments of the twentieth century-the other two being the 
electronics revolution and the unleashing of the power of the atom. The airplane has 
J 

===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
4 
Figure 1.1 
P A R T 1 ® Preliminary Considerations 
Cessna 172. (Courtesy of Cessna Aircraft.) 
Figure 1.2 Boeing 777. (Courtesy of Boeing.) 
transformed life in the twentieth century, and this transformation continues as you 
read these words. 
However, the airplane did not just "happen." When you see an aircraft in the 
sky, you are observing the resulting action of the natural laws of nature that govern 
flight. The human understanding of these laws of flight did not come easily-it has 

===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
evolved over the past 2,500 years, starting with ancient Greek science. It was not 
until a cold day in December 1903 that these laws were finally harnessed by human 
beings to a degree sufficient to allow a heavier-than-air, powered, human-carrying 
machine to execute a successful sustained flight through the air. On December 17 
of that year, Orville and Wilbur Wright, with pride and great satisfaction, reaped the 
fruits of their labors and became the first to fly the first successful flying machine. 
In Fig. 1.3, the Wright Flyer is shown at the instant of liftoff from the sands of Kill 
Devil Hill, near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, at 10:35 on that morning, on its way 
to the first successful flight-you are looking at the most famous photograph in the 
annals of the history of aeronautics. At that moment, the Wright brothers knew they 
had accomplished something important-a feat aspired to by many before them, but 
heretofore never achieved. But they had no way of knowing the tremendous extent 
to which their invention of the first successful airplane was to dominate the course of 
the twentieth century~technically, socially, and politically. 
The airplane is the subject of this book-its performance and its design. The 
purpose of this book is to pass on to you an appreciation "Of the laws of flight, and 
the embodiment of these laws in a form that allows the understanding and predic­
tion of how the airplane will actually perform in the air (airplane performance) and 
how to approach the creation of the airplane in the first place in order to achieve a 
desired performance or mission (the creative process of airplane design). By 1903, 
the Wright brothers had achieved a rudimentary understanding of the principles of 
airplane performance, and they had certainly demonstrated a high degree of creativity 
in their inventive process leading to the design of the Wright Flyer. (See the book by · 
Jakab, Ref. 1, for a definitive analysis of the Wrights's process of invention.) Today, 
our analyses of airplane performance have advanced much further, and the modem 
process of airplane design demands even greater creativity. The processes of air­
plane performance and airplane design are intimately coupled-one does not happen 
without the other. Therefore, the purpose of this book is to present the elements of 
both performance and design in an integrated treatment, and to do so in such fash­
ion as to give you both a technical and a philosophical understanding of the process. 
Figure 1.3 The Wright Flyer, at the moment of liftoff on its first Right, December 17, 1903. 
s 

===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Hopefully, this book will give you a better idea of how the aeronautical engineer mixes 
"engineering options on his technological palette and applies them to his canvas," as 
nicely stated by Richard Smith in the quotation at the beginning of this chapter. 
1.2 FOUR HISTORICAL PERIODS OF AIRPLANE DESIGN 
CHARACTERISTICS 
Before we proceed to the technical aspects of airplane performance and design, it 
is useful to briefly survey the historical evolution of these aspects, in order to have 
a better appreciation of modem technology. In this section, the technical evolution 
of the airplane is divided into four eras: (1) pre-Wright attempts, (2) strut-and-wire 
biplanes, (3) mature propeller-driven airplanes, and (4) jet-propelled airplanes. We 
have room for only short discussions of these eras; for a more detailed presentation, 
see Ref. 2. 
If you like aeronautical history, this chapter is for you. However, if you do not 
particularly want to read about history or do not see the value in doing so, this chapter 
is especially for you. Whether you like it or not, good airplane design requires a 
knowledge of previous designs, that is, a knowledge of history. Even the Wright 
Flyer in 1903 was as much evolutionary as it was revolutionary, because the Wright 
brothers drew from a prior century of aeronautical work by others. Throughout the 
twentieth century, most new airplane designs were evolutionary, depending greatly 
on previous airplanes. Indeed, even the most recent airplane designs, such as the 
Boeing 777 commercial transport and the F-22 supersonic military fighter, contain 
the "genes" of 200 years of flying machine design. If you are interested in learning 
about airplane design, you need to know about these genes. So no matter what your 
innate interest in reading history may be, this chapter is an essential part of your 
education in airplane design. Please read it and benefit from it, in this spirit. 
1.2.1 Pre-Wright Era 
Before the Wright brothers's first flight, there were no successful airplane designs, 
hence no successful demonstrations of airplane performance. However, there were 
plenty of attempts. Perhaps the best way of gaining an appreciation of these attempts is 
to go through the following fanciful thought experiment Imagine that you were born 
on a desolate island somewhere in the middle of the ocean, somehow completely 
devoid of any contact with the modem world-no television, radio, newspapers, 
magazines, etc. And imagine that for some reason you were possessed with the idea 
of flying through the air. What would you do? Would you immediately conceive 
of the idea of the modem airplane with a fixed wing, fuselage, and tail, propelled 
by some separate prime mover such as a reciprocating or jet engine? Certainly not! 
Most likely you would look at the skies, watch the birds, and then try to emulate the 
birds. To this end, you would fashion some kind of wings out of wood or feathers, 
strap these wings to your arms, climb to the roof of your hut, and jump off, flapping 

===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
wildly. However, after only a few of these attempts (maybe only after one such trial), 
you would most certainly conclude that there had to be a better way. Indeed, history 
is full of such accounts of people attempting to fly by means of wings strapped to their 
arms and/or legs-the aeronautical historians call such people tower jumpers. They 
were all singularly unsuccessful. So perhaps you on your desolate island might talce 
the next evolutionary step; namely, .you might design some mechanical mechanism 
that you could push or pull with your hands and arms, or pump with your legs, and 
this mechanical mechanism would have wings that would flap up and down. Such 
mechanisms are called ornithopters. Indeed, no less a great mind than Leonardo da 
Vinci designed numerous such omithopters in the period from 1486 to 1490; one 
of da Vinci's own drawings from his voluminous notebooks is reproduced in Fig. 
1.4. However,. one look at this machine shows you that it has no aerodynamically 
redeeming value! To this day, no human-powered ornithopter has ever successfully 
flown. So, after a few trials with your own mechanical device on your desolate island, 
you would most likely give up your quest for flight altogether. Indeed, this is what 
happened to most would-be aviators before the beginning of the nineteenth century. 
So we pose the question: Where and from whom did the idea of the modem 
configun1tion airplane come? The modem configuration, that which we talce for 
granted tod&y, is a flying machine with fixed wings, a fuselage, and a tail, with a 
separate mechanism for propulsion. This concept was first pioneered by Sir George 
Cayley (Fig. 1.5) in England in 1799. In that year, Cayley inscribed on a silver disk 
two sketches that were seminal to the development of the airplane. Shown at the 
left in Fig. 1.6 is the sketch on one side of the silver disk; it illustrates for the first 
time in history a flying machine with a fixed wing, a fuselage, and a tail. Cayley is 
responsible for conceiving and advancing the basic idea that the mechanisms for lift 
Original' sketch of an ornithopter by da Vinci, circa 1492. 
7 

===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
PART 1 e Considerations 
1.5 Sir George Cayley (1773- 1857). 
Figure 1.6 Silver disk inscribed by George Cayley showing !he concept of !he modern 
configuration airplane, 1799. 
and thrust should be separated, with fixed wings moving at an angle of attack through 
the air to generate lift and a separate propulsive device to generate thrust. He rec­
ognized that the function of thrust was to overcome drag. In his own 
words, he stated that the basic aspect of a machine is "to make a surface 
a given weight the 
the disk, shown at the right of drew the first 
in the history of aeronautical Here we see the edge view of a ,w,·u'""·'° 
at an of attack to the relative wind wind ls shown as a horizon-
tal arrow, toward the force is shown as the 

===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
CH PT E The E·,1olution of the and Its Performance: A Short History 
line inclined perpendicular to the plate. This resultant force 
is then resolved into perpendicular and parallel to the relative wind, that 
is, the lift and respectively. This silver disk, no larger than a U.S. quarter, is 
now in the collection of the British Science Museum in London. In this fashion, the 
concept of the modern airplane was born. (More extensive discussions 
by the author Cayley's contributions to aeronautics can be found in Refs. 3 
and 4; definitive studies of his life and contributions are contained in Refs. 5 and 6.) 
To key on Cayley's seminal ideas, the nineteenth century was full of abortive 
attempts to actually build and fly fixed-wing, powered, human-can-ying flying ma­
chines. Cayley himself built several full-size aircraft over the span of his long life 
(he died in 1857 at the age of but was unsuccessful in achieving sustained flight. 
Some of the mo.st important would-be inventors of the airplane-such as William 
Samuel Henson and John Stringfellow in England, Felix Du Temple in France, and 
Alexander Mozhaiski in Russia-are discussed in chapter 1 of Ref. 3; hence no fur­
ther elaboration will be given here. They were all unsuccessful in achieving sustained 
flight In regard to the nature of airplane performance and design, we note that these 
enthusiastic but unsuccessful inventors were obsessed with horsepower (or thrust). 
They were mainly concerned with equipping their aircraft with engines powerful 
enough to accelerate the machine to a velocity high enough that the aerodynamic lift 
of the wings would become large enough to raise the machine off the ground and into 
the air. Unfortunately, all suffered from the same circular argument-the more 
powerful th.e engine, the heavier it weighs; the heavier the machine is, the faster it 
must move to produce enough lift to get off the ground; the faster the machine must 
move, the more powerful (and hence heavier) the engine must be-which is where we 
entered this circular argument. A way out of this quandary is to develop engines with 
more power without an increase in engine weight, or more precisely, to design engines 
with larger horsepower-to-weight ratios. we will find this ratio, or more impor­
tantly the thrust-to-weight ratio W for the entire aircraft, to be a critical parameter 
in airplane performance and design. In the nineteenth century, inventors of flying 
machines functioned mainly on the basis of intuition, with little quantitative analysis 
to guide them. They knew that, to accelerate the aircraft, thrust had to be greater than 
the drag; that T - D had to be a positive number. And the larger the thrust and the 
smaller the drag, the better things were. In essence, most of the nineteenth-century 
flying machine inventors were obsessed with brute force-given enough thrust (or 
horsepower) from the engine, the airplane could be wrestled into the air. The aviation 
historians call such people "chauffeurs." They were so busy trying to get the flying 
machine off the ground that they paid little attention to how the machine would be 
controlled once it got into the air-their idea was that somehow the machine could 
be "chauffeured" in the air much as a carriage driven on the ground. This philosophy 
led to failure in all such cases. 
Perhaps the of the chauffeurs was Sir Hiram Maxim, a U.S. expatriate 
from Texas in To the general world, Maxim is known as the inventor 
of the first automatic machine gun. Developed by Maxim in England around 
the guns were manufactured Vickers in England and were used by every 
army around: the globe. wealth thus dedved allowed Maxim to the 

===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
C H A ~ T E R 1 ;, The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Perfo1mance: A Short History 
line inclined perpendicular to the plate. This resultant force 
-~·'""·-"-'"'U perpendicular and parallel to the relative wind, that 
the lift and This silver no larger than a U.S. quarter, is 
now in the collection of the British Science Museum in London. In this fashion, the 
concept of the modern configuration was born. (More extensive discussions 
by the author of George Cayley's contributions to aeronautics can be found in Refs. 3 
and 4; definitive studies of his life and contributions are contained i~ Refs. 5 and 6.) 
To key on Cayley's seminal ideas, the nineteenth century was full of abortive 
attempts to build and fixed-wing, powered, human-Cai.Tying flying ma­
chines. Cayley himself several full-size aircraft over the span of his long life 
(he died in 1857 at the age of 83), but was unsuccessful in achieving sustained flight 
Some of the mo.st important would-be inventors of the airplane-such as 
Samuel Henson and 
John Stringfellow in England, Felix Du Temple in France, and 
Alexander Mozhaiski in Russia-are discussed in chapter 1 of Ref. 3; hence no fur­
ther elaboration will be given here. They were ali unsuccessful in achieving sustained 
flight. In regard to the nature of airplane performance and design, we note that these 
enthusiastic but unsuccessful inventors were obsessed with horsepower (or thrust). 
They were concerned with equipping their aircraft with engines powerful 
enough to accelerate the machine to a velocity high enough that the aerodynamic lift 
of the wings would become large enough to raise the machine off the ground and into 
the air. Unfortunately, they all suffered from the same circular argument-the more 
powerful the engine, the heavier it weighs; the heavier the machine is, the faster it 
must move to produce enough lift to get off the ground; the faster the machine must 
move, the more powerful (and hence heavier) the engine must be-which is where we 
entered this circular argument. A way out of this quandary is to develop engines with 
more power without an increase in weight, or more precisely, to design engines 
with larger horsepower-to-weight ratios. Later, we will find this ratio, or more impor­
tantly the ratio T / W for the entire aircraft, to be a critical parameter 
in airplane performance and design. In the nineteenth century, inventors of flying 
machines functioned mainly on the basis of intuition, with little quantitative analysis 
to guide them. They knew to accelerate the aircraft, thrust had to be greater than 
the drag; that T ·- D had to be a positive number. And the larger the thrust and the 
smaller the drag, the better things were. In essence, most of the nineteenth-century 
flying machine inventors were obsessed with brute force-given enough thrust (or 
horsepower) from the engine, the airplane could be wrestled into the air. The aviation 
historians call such people "chauffeurs." They were so busy trying to get the flying 
machine off the ground that they paid little attention to how the machine would be 
controlled once it got into the air-their idea was that somehow the machine could 
be "chauffeured" in the air much as a carriage driven on the ground. This philosophy 
led to failure in all such cases. 
Perhaps epitome of the chauffeurs was Sir Hi.ram Maxim, a U.S. expatriate 
from Texas living in England. To the general 
world, Maxim is known as the inventor 
of the first fully automatic machine gun. Developed by Maxim in England around 
1884, the guns were manufactured by Vickers in England and were used by every 
army around the wealth thus derived allowed Maxim to the 

===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
P A R T 1 e Preliminary Considerations 
design of a flying machine. From results obtained from his own wind tunnel tests, 
Maxim designed the huge airplane shown in Fig. 1.7. Built in 1893, the machine was 
powered by two ! SO-horsepower ( l lightweight (for their steam engines 
of Maxim's design, driving two propellers. The total weight of the flying machine, 
including its three-person crew, was about 8,000 pounds (lb). On July 31, 1894, on 
the grounds of the rented Baldwyns Park in Kent, the Maxim airplane actually took 
off, although in a very limited sense. The airplane had a four-wheel undercarriage of 
steel wheels which ran along a straight, specially laid, railway trnck of l ,800 feet (ft) 
in length. Above the track was a wooden guardrail which engaged the undercarriage 
after about a 2-ft rise of the machine; Maxim was careful to not damage the aircraft, 
and hence he limited its height after takeoff to about 2 ft. On that day in July, 
the Maxim flying machine rolled down the track for 600 ft and lifted off. Almost 
immediately it engaged the guardrail. and Maxim quickly shut the steam off to the two 
engines. The Maxim flying machine came to a stop-but not without demonstrating 
that the engines were powerful enough to accelerate the machine to a high enough 
velocity that sufficient lift could be generated to raise the aircraft off the ground. With 
this demonstration, Maxim quit his aeronautical investigations until 191 O~well after 
the stunning, successful demonstrations of almost "effortless" flight by the Wright 
brothers. As with all chauffeurs, Maxim's work was of little value to the state of the 
art of airplane design, and his aeronautical activities were soon forgotten by most 
people. This is in spite of the fact that Maxim supported this work out of his own 
pocket, spending over £30,000. In the words of the famous British aviation historian 
figure 1.7 Hiram Maxim and his flying machine, 1894. 

===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
Charles H. Gibbs-Smith (Ref. 7), commenting on Maxim's efforts: "It had all been 
time and money wasted. Maxim's contribution to aviation was virtually nil, and he 
influenced nobody." This indeed was the fate of all would-be inventors of the airplane 
during the nineteenth century who followed the chauffeur's philosophy. We mention 
Maxim here only because he is a classic example of this philosophy. 
The antithesis of the chauffeur's philosophy was the "airman's" approach. This 
latter philosophy simply held that, in order to design a successful flying machine, it 
was necessary to first getup in the air and experience flight with a vehicle unencum­
bered by a power plant; that is, you should learn to fly before putting an engine on the 
aircraft. The person who introduced and pioneered the airman's philosophy was Otto 
Lilienthal, a German mechanical engineer, who designed and flew the first success­
ful gliders in history. Lilienthal first carried out a long series of carefully organized 
aerodynamic experiments, covering a period of ab.out 20 years, from which he clearly 
demonstrated the aerodynamic superiority of cambered (curved) airfoils in compari­
son to flat, straight smfaces. His experiments were extensive and meticulously carried 
out. They were published in 1890 in a book entitled Der Vogelfiug als Grund/age 
der Fliegekunst (Bird Flight as the Basis of Aviation); this book was far and away the 
most important and definitive contribution to the budding science of aerodynamics to 
appear in the nineteenth century. It greatly influenced aeronauticai design for the next 
15 years, and was the bible for the early work of the Wright brothers. Among other 
contributions, Lilienthal presented drag polars in his book-the first drag polars to 
be published in the history of aeronautical engineering. (We will define and discuss 
drag polars in Chapter 2-they reflect all the aerodynamic information necessary 
for the performance analysis of an airplane.) Lilienthal's aerodynamic research led 
to a quantum jump in aerodynamics at- the end of the nineteenth century. (See the 
extensive analysis of Lilienthal's aerodynamics contained in Ref. 8.) 
During the period from 1891 through 1896, Lilienthal designed, built, and flew 
a number of gliders. With these successful glider flights, over 2,000 during the 5-
year period, he personified the airman's philosophy. A photograph of Lilienthal on 
one of his gliders is shown in Fig. 1.8; he supported himself by grasping a bar with 
his arms, and the part of his body below his chest and shoulders simply dangled 
below the wings. He controlled his gliders by swinging his body-he was indeed the 
inventor of the hang glider. With these glider flights, Lilienthal advanced the cause 
of aeronautics by leaps and bounds. Many of his flights were public demonstrations; 
his fame spread far and wide. In the United States, stories and photographs of his 
flights were carried in popular magazines-the Wright brothers read about Lilienthal 
in McClure's magazine, a popular periodical of that day. Lilienthal was a professional 
mechanical engineer with a university degree, hence he had some credibility-and 
there he was, gliding through the air on machines of his own design. With this, 
the general public moved a little closer to acceptance that the quest for powered, 
heavier-than-ai.r flight was respectable and serious. 
On Sunday, August 9, 1896, Otto Lilienthal was once again flying from Gollen­
berg Hill in the Rhinow mountains, about 100 kilometers (km) northwest of Berlin. 
His first flight went well. However, during his second glide he encountered an unex­
pected sharp gust of air; his glider pitched up and stalled. Lilienthal violently swung 
11 

===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
PART l ~ Considerations 
figure 1.8 Otto Lilienthal Hying one of his monoplane gliders, 1894. 
his body to regain control of the glider, but to no avail. He crashed and died the next 
day in a Berlin clinic from a broken back. 
At the time of his death, Lilienthal was working on a power plant for one of 
his glider designs. There is some feeling that, had he lived, Lilienthal may have 
preempted the Wright 
brothers and been the first to fly a powered machine. However, 
upon further investigation (Ref. 8) we find that his engine was intended to power a 
flapping motion of the outer wing panels-shades of the ornithopter concept. This 
author feels that had Lilienthal continued to pursue this course of action, he would 
have most certainly failed. 
The last, and perhaps the most dramatic, failure of the pre-Wright era was the 
attempt by Samuel P. Langley to build a flying machine for the U.S. government. 
Intensely interested in the physics and technology of powered flight, Langley began 
a series of aerodynamic experiments in l 887, using a whirling arm apparatus. At the 
time, he was the director of the Allegheny Observatory in Pittsburgh. Within a year he 
seized the opportunity to become the third Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution 
in Washington, District of Columbia. Once on the Smithsonian's mall, Langley 
continued with his aeronautical experiments, including the building and flying of 
a number of elastic-powered models. The results of his whirling arm experiments 
were published in his book in Aerodynamics in l 890-a classic treatise 
that is well worth reading today. In 1896, the same year that Lilienthal was killed, 
Langley was successful in flying several small-scale, unmanned, aircraft, 
which he called aerodromes. These 14-ft-wingspan, steam-powered aerodromes were 
launched from the top of a small houseboat on the Potomac River, and flew for 
about a minute, close to I-mile over the river. These were the first 

===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
C H A P T E R 1 0 The Evolution of the and Its Performance: A Short 
steam-powered, heavier-than-air machines to successfully fly-an historic event in 
the history of aeronautics that is not always appreciated today. 
However, this was to be the zenith of Langley's success. Spurred by the exigency 
of'the Spanish-American War, Langley was given a grant from the War 
Department to construct and fly a full-scale, person-carrying aerodrome. He hired 
an assistant, Charles Manly, who was a fresh, young graduate of the Sibley School 
of Mechanical Engineering at Cornell University. Together, they set out to build the 
required flying machine. The advent of the gasoline-powered internal-combustion 
engine in Europe convinced them that the aerodrome should be powered by a gasoline­
fueled reciprocating engine turning a propeller. Langley had calculated that, for his 
new aerodrome, he needed an engine that would at least 12 hp and weigh 
no more than 120 lb. This horsepower-to-weight ratio was well above that available 
in any engine of the time; indeed, Balzer Company in New York, under subcontract 
from Langley to design and build such an engine, went bankrupt trying. Manly then 
personally took over the engine design in the basement of the original "castle" building 
of the Smithsonian, and 190 l he had assembled a radically designed five-cylinder 
radial engine, shown in Fig. 1.9. This engine only 124 lb and produced a 
phenomenal 52.4 It was to be the best airplane power plant designed until the 
beginning of World War I. The full-scale aerodrome, equipped with Manly's engine, 
Figure 1.9 The first radial 
Charles Manly, 1 
for an developed 

===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
PART e Preliminary Considerations 
was ready in 1903. The first attempted flight-on October 7, 1903-with Manly at 
the controls resulted in the aerodrome's falling into the river moments after its launch 
by a catapult mounted on top of a new houseboat on the Potomac River. Undaunted, 
Langley rationalized that the aerodrome was fouled in the catapult mechanism at 
the instant of launch. The aerodrome, somewhat damaged, was fished out of the 
river (Manly was fortunately unhurt) and returned to the Smithsonian for repairs. On 
December 8, 1903, they were ready to try again; the scenario was the same-the 
same pilot, the same aerodrome, the same houseboat. A photograph of the Langley 
aerodrome, taken just a moment after launch, is shown in Fig. 1.10. Here we see the 
Langley aerodrome going through a 90° angle of attack; the rear wings of the tandem 
wing design have collapsed totally. Again, Manly was retrieved from the river unhurt, 
but this was the rather unglorious end of Langley's aeronautical work. 
Langley's aerodrome and the fate that befell it, as shown in Fig. 1.10, are an 
excellent study in the basic aspects of airplane design. The aircraft had a superb 
power plant. Its aerodynamic design, based mainly bn 14 years of experimentation 
by Langley, was marginally good-at least it was sufficient for Langley's purposes. 
Figure 1.10 The Langley aerodrome an instant after 
launch, December 8, 1903. 

===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
CHAPTER @> The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
However, a recent in-house study by Dr. Howard Wolko, a mechanical and aerospace 
engineer now retired from the National Air and Space Museum, showed that the 
Langley aerodrome was structurally unsound-a result certainly in keeping with the 
aerodrome's failure, shown in Fig. 1.10. This illustrates a basic tenet of any system 
design, such as an airplane or a stereo system, namely, that the system is no better 
than its weakest link. In Langley's case, in spite of excellent propulsion and adequate 
aerodynamics, it was the poor structural design that resulted in failure of the whole 
system. 
In spite of this failure, Langley deserves a lot of credit for his aeronautical work 
in the pre-Wright era. You experience some of the legacy left by Langley's name 
everytime you walk into the Langley Theater at the National Air and Space Museum 
in Washington, or visit the NASA Langley Research Center, built right beside Langley 
Air Force Base in Hampton, Virginia. 
The story of Langley's aeronautical work is covered in much greater detail in 
Refs. 8 through 10, among others. In particular, Ref. 8 contains a detailed discussion 
of Langley's aerodynamics, and Ref. 10 has an extremely interesting and compelling 
presentation of the human dynamics associated with Langley's overall quest to build 
a flying machine. 
1.2.2 Era of St:rut~and~ Wire Biplanes 
The 1903 Wright Flyer ushered in the era of successful strut-and-wire biplanes-an 
era that covers the general period from 1903 to 1930. Unlike Langley's full-scale 
aerodrome, there were no fatal "weak links" in the design of the Wright Flyer. There 
is no doubt in this author's mind that Orville and Wilbur Wright were the first true 
aeronautical engineers in history. With the 1903 Wright Flyer, they had gotten it all 
right-the propulsion, aerodynamic, structural, and control aspects were carefully 
calculated and accounted for during its design. The Wright brothers were the first to 
fully understand the airplane as a whole and complete system, in which the individual 
components had to work in a complementary fashion so that the integrated system 
would perform as desired. A three-view drawing of the 1903 Wright Flyer is shown 
in Fig. 1.11. 
Volumes have been written about the Wright brothers and their flying machines­
their story is one of the greatest success stories in the history of technology. In our 
brief review of the evolution of the airplane in this chapter, it is perhaps better to 
defer to these volumes of literature than to attempt to relate the Wright brothers's 
story-we simply do not have space to do it justice. You are referred particularly to 
the authors's discussions of the Wright brothers in chapter l of Ref. 3, and in Ref. 
9. The study by Jakab (Ref. 1) is an excellent portrait of the inventive processes 
of the Wright brothers as they created the first successful airplane. Similarly, Tom 
Crouch in his book The Bishop's Boys (Ref. 11) has painted an excellent humanistic 
portrait of the Wright brothers and their family as people caught up in this whirlwind 
of inventiveness-Crouch's book is the most definitive biography of the Wrights to 
date. For an extensive discussion of the Wright brothers's aerodynamics, see Ref. 8. 

===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
16 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
~,_A_t~ 
:il;i/, !: l!i.?ri··t:.:·.:)--\C< 1 '.;•:;_j;1, 
-=--. --.................... -~.!· t, ....... ,l .. -~ ..... '":'I. 'J'.'!.! .• ,--~--··-.- .... ...:!. 
I : • . ; !:' ' i ·, ! ~77"'.JJ • : , _: ' : : ': l 
·, ,. '--'...._ __ ,--.c. 
Fig1Jrel,1 l Three-view of the Wright Flyer, 1903. 
Instead, let us. dwell for a moment on the Wright Flyer itself as an airplane 
design. In Figs. 1.3 and 1.11, you see all the elements of a successful flying machine. 
Propulsion was achieved by a four~cylinder in-line engine designed and built by 
Orville Wright with- the help of their newly hired mechanic in the bicycle shop, 
Charlie Taylor. ffproduced close to 12 hp and weighed 140 lb:----barely on the margin 
of what the Wrights had calculated as the minimum necessary to get the flyer into 
the air. This engine drove two propellers via a bicyclelike chain loop. The propellers 
theIIlselves were a masterpiece of aerodynamic design. Wilbur Wright was the first 
person in history to recognize the fundamental principle that a propeller is nothing 
more than a twisted wing oriented in a direction such that the aerodynamic force 
produced by the propeller was predominately in the thrust direction. Wilbur conceived 
the first viable propeller theory in the history of ~eronautical engineering; vestiges 
of Wilbur's analyses carry though today in the standard "blade element" propeller 
theory. Moreover, the Wrights had built a wind tunnel, and during the fall and winter 
of 1901 to 1902, they carried out tests on hundreds of different airfoil and wing 
shapes. Wilbur incorporated these experimental data in his propeller analyses; the 
result was a propeller with an efficiency that was close to 70% (propeller efficiency is 
the power output from the propeller compared to the power input to the propeller from 

===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
CHAPTER <11 The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
the engine shaft). This represented a dramatic improvement of propeller performance 
over contemporary practice. For example, Langley reported a propeller efficiency of 
only 52% for his aerodromes. Today, a modem, variable-pitch propeller can achieve 
efficiencies as high as 85% to 90%. However, in 1903, the Wrights's propeller 
efficiency of 70% was simply phenomenal. It was one of the lesser-known but most 
compelling reasons for the success of the Wright Flyer. With their marginal engine 
linked to their highly efficient propellers, the Wrights had the propulsion aspect of 
airplane design well in hand. 
The aerodynamic features of the Wright Flyer were predominately a result of 
their wind tunnel tests of numerous wing and airfoil shapes. The Wrights were well 
aware that the major measure of aerodynamic efficiency is the lift-to-drag ratio L / D. 
They knew that the lift of an aircraft must equal its weight in order to sustain the 
machine in the air, and that almost any configuration could produce enough lift if the 
angle of attack were sufficiently large. But the secret of "good aerodynamics" is to 
produce this lift with as small a drag as possible, that is, to design an aircraft with as 
large an L/ D value as possible. To accomplish this, the Wrights did three things: 
1. They chose an airfoil shape that, based on the collective data from their wind 
tunnel tests, would give 
a high L/ D. The airfoil used on the Wright Flyer was a thin, 
cambered shape, with a camber ratio (ratio of maximum camber to chord length) 
of 1/20, with the maximum camber near the quarter-chord location. (In contrast, 
Lilienthal favored airfoils that were circular arcs, i.e., with maximum camber at 
midchord.) It is interesting that the precise airfoil shape used for the Wright Flyer 
was never tested by the Wright brothers in their wind tunnel. By 1903, they had so 
much confidence in their understanding of airfoil and wing properties that, in spite 
of their characteristic conservative philosophy, they felt it unnecessary to test that 
specific shape. 
2. They chose an aspect ratio of 6 for the wings. They had experimented with 
gliders at Kitty Hawk in the summers of 1900 and 1901, and they were quite disap­
pointed in their aerodynamic performance. The wing aspect ratio of these early gliders 
was 3. However, their wind tunnel tests clearly indicated that higher-aspect-ratio 
wings produced higher values of L/ D. (This was not a new discovery; the advan­
tage of high-aspect-ratio wings had been first theorized by Francis Wenham in 1866. 
Langley's whirling arm data, published in 1890, proved conclusively that better per­
formance was obtained with higher-aspect-ratio wings. It is a bit of a mystery why 
the Wrights, who were very well read and had access to these results, did not pick 
up on this important aerodynamic feature right from the start.) In any event, based 
on their own wind tunnel results, the Wrights immediately adopted an aspect ratio 
of 6 for their 1902 glider, and the following year for the 1903 flyer. At the time, the 
Wrights had no way of knowing about the existence of induced drag; this aerodynamic 
phenomenon was not understood until the work of Ludwig Prandtl in Germany 15 
years later. The Wrights did not know that, by increasing the aspect ratio from 3 to 6, 
they reduced the induced drag by a factor of 2. They only knew from their empirical 
results that the ratio of the 6-aspect-ratio wing was much improved over their 
wing designs. 
17 

===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
HI PART Preliminary Considerations 
3. The were very conscious of the which in 
their day was called head resistance. used formulas obtained from 
Octave Chanute to estimate the head resistance for their machines. Chanute 
was a well-known civil and railroad who had become very interested in 
aeronautics. He in 1893 aeronautical work 
from around the world in a book 
a classic----'-'you can still 
their intensive inventive work in 1900 to 
prone while their ,rn1<.,1u""~, 
as Lilienthal had 
ua.uie.uAJ.g underneath 
ucLH~u,,, "'" head resistance. In 
even tested a series of wooden struts in an airstream i.n order to find the 
cross-sectionai that gave minimum did not appreciate 
the inordinately drag also 
wings. Of course, 
strengthen biplane 
were very conscious of 
possibly 
The 
wind tunnel tests of models the 
reported in the paper Culick and Jex 
it as low 
Modem 
1982 and 1983 as 
This value is consistent with values of 
indicate a maximum L/ D of 6. 
measured by Gustave Eiffel 
in 1910 in his large wind tunnel in Paris for models of a 
(see Ref. Loftin 
Fokker 
a value 
The control features of the are also one of the basic reasons for 
its success. brothers were the first to the of 
control around a!.l three axes of the aircraft. Pitch control. obtained 
an or part ofthe horizontal tail ( or the forward canard such as on the 
yaw obtained deflection of the vertical were features recognized by 
investigators before the for example, aerodrome had pitch and yaw 
contmls. However, no one except the Wrights the value of roll control. 
Their novel idea of the to control the rolling motion 
of the airplane, and to jointly control roll and yaw for coordinated turns, was one of 
contributions to aeronautical Indeed, when Wilbur 
demonstrations of their flying machines in 
! 908, the two technical features of the machines 
aviators were their roll control 
had the control 

===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
CHAPTER 1 The Evolution the and Its Performance: A Short 
the structural features of the 
work of Octave Chanute and 
carried out tests of 
technical feature of Chanute's 
a biplane struc-
ratio was 
of the Folz-Jeer E-HI designed IO years later was 
not different from 
that of the Considering that l O years of progress in aircraft structural 
had been made between the 1903 and the Fokker the strnctural 
design of the 1903 seems advanced for its time. 
And the fact that the 
December 903. 
well in hand. 
In summary, the 
their system worked ~T,.~,,T,., and 
well demonstrated on 
had the structural aspect of 
and structures. There were no fatal weak Iinkso The reason for this was u°'le natural 
inventiveness and abilities -of 
this ern. The famous World War 
17 and the SPAD the German 
are described below. 
and since there existed no successful 
time which could demonstrate the use the idea and the 
Ailerons in the form of ,,..,,.,",u",~ 
were in 
Curtiss won the 
Scientific American Prize on 
1000meters 

===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
AIRCRAFT PERFORMANCE 
AND DESIGN 
John D. Anderson, Jr. 
University of Maryland 
Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited 
NEW DELHI 
McGraw-Hill Offices 
New Delhi New York St Louis San Francisco Auckland Bogota Caracas , ··· 
Kuala Lumpur Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City . Milan Montreal 
San Juan Santiago Singapore Sidney Tokyo Toronto 

===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
20 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
and low~r wings, as seen in Fig. 1.12. Finally, in 1909 the Frenchman Henri Farman 
designed a biplane named the Henri Farman Ill, which included a flaplike aileron at 
the trailing edge of all four wingtips; this was the true ancestor of the conventional 
modem-day aileron. Farman's design was soon adopted by most designers, and wing 
warping quickly became passe. Only the Wright 
brothers clung to their old concept; 
a Wright airplane did not incorporate ailerons until 1915, six years after Farman's 
development. 
Second, the open framework of the fuselage, such as seen in the Wright Flyer 
and the Curtiss Gold Bug, was in later designs enclosed. by fabric. The first such 
airplane to have this feature was a Nieuport monoplane built in 1910, shown in Fig. 
1.13. This was an attempt at "streamlining" the airplane, although at that time the 
concept of streamlining was only an intuitive process rather than the result of real 
technical knowledge and understanding about drag reduction. 
Third, the demands for improved airplane performance during World War I gave 
a rebirth to the idea of "brute force" in airplane design. In relation to the thrust minus 
Figure 1.12 Glenn Curtiss ~ying his Gold Bug. Note the midwing ailerons. 
Figure 1.13' Nieuport monoplane, 1910. 

===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
The E·-.1olution 
war, 
the 
rnan? 
.14 SPAD Xiii, 1917. 
and Its Perfonnance: A Short 
in their quest 
increased the thrust rather than decreased 
The SPAD 
War I, had a tt1spano-,:::iu1za 
used on a 
conservative, and 
The conservative 
1930s is summarized 

===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
22 P A R T l • Preliminary Considerations 
However, some designers had vision; during the 1920s some knew what had 
to be done to greatly improve airplane performance. For example, the concept of 
streamlining to reduce drag was a major topic of discussion. The famous French 
airplane designer Louis Brequet, in a talk given to the Royal Aeronautical Society on 
April 6, 1922, showed his appreciation of the value of streamlining the airplane when 
he said 
The conclusion is that one must bring to the minimum the value of D / L. It can be 
obtain.ed by choosing the best possible profile for the wings, the best designs for the 
body, empennage, etc. Moreover, the undercarriage should be made to disappear 
inside the body on the wings when the aeroplane is in flight. 
Here we have Brequet calling for retractable landing gear, something not seen on any 
contemporary aircraft of that day. 
There were exceptions to the tried-and-proven way of evolutionary airplane de­
sign during the 1920s. Air races, with prizes for speed, were popular. The interna­
. tional Schneider Cup races were perhaps the most important and seminal of them all. 
On December 5, 1912, the French industrialist Jacques Schneider announced a com­
petition to promote the development of seaplanes. He offered an impressive trophy 
to the first nation that could win the race three times out of a series of five successive 
yearly events. Starting in Monaco in 1913, the Schneider Cup races continued on an 
almost annual basis (interrupted by World War I). Winning the Schneider Cup race 
became a mattter of national prestige for some countries; as a result, every effort was 
made to increase speed. Specialized high-power engines were designed and built, 
and extreme (for that time) measures were taken to reduce drag. For example, the 
1925 winner of the Schneider race was Lieutenant Jimmy Doolittle, flying an Army 
Curtiss R3C-2 biplane, as shown in Fig. 1.15. The high degree of streamlining in this 
aircraft is clearly evident; powered by a 619-hp Curtiss V-1400 engine, the R3C-2 
achieved a· speed of 232.57 mi/h over the course of the race. The Schneider Trophy 
was finally permanently acquired in 1931 by Britain, winning the last three races 
Figure 1.15 Curtiss R3C-2, Aown by Jimmy Doolittle, winner of the 1925 Schneider Cup race. 

===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
Performance: A Short 
L iha; won the Schneider for Great 
Brih::iiri, l 9Ti 
aircraft which were precursers to the famous British 
had initiated the to 
to take off from and land on water. 
winner was the Supermarine S.6B 
both the S.6B and the Schneider are 
London. The 
it is even more phenomenal 
Jacques Schneider 
such as those for the Schneider Cup races, 
cm,ri-r1rc;VP'1 way Of design. 
aircraft. However, they 
aeronautical research and 
from 1930 to 1950 can be clas~ified as the era of the mature, propeller­
new technical features 
of aircaft increased 
23 

===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
24 PART Preliminary Considerations 
The maturity of the propeller-driven airplane is due to nine major technical ad­
vancements. all of which came to fruition during the l 930s. These technical advance­
ments are discussed below. 
First; the cantilevered-wing monoplane gradually replaced the strut-and-wire 
biplane. The main reason for the dominance of the biplane in early airplane design 
was structural strength. The struts and wires had a purpose; two wings of relatively 
short span, trussed together as a stiff box, were structurally sounder than if the same 
total wing area were spread out over a singie wing with larger span. Moreover, 
the moment of inertia about the roll axis was smaller for the shorter-span biplanes, 
leading to more rapid rolling maneuverability. For these reasons, pilots and airplane 
designers Were reluctant to give up the biplane; for example, it was not until 1934 
that the British Air Ministry ordered monoplane fighters for the first time. This 
is hot to say that monoplanes did not exist before the l 930s; quite the contrary, a 
number of early monoplane designs were carried out before World War I. When 
Louis Bleriot became the first person to fly across the English Channel on July 25, 
1909, it was in a monoplane of his own design (although there are some reasons 
to believe that the airplane was designed in part by Raymond Saulnier), Because 
of the publicity foliowing Bleriot's channel crossing, the monoplane experienced a 
surge of popularity. Bleriot himself sold hundreds of his Bleriot XI monoplanes, 
and it dominated the aviation scene until l 913. Its popularity was somewhat muted, 
however, by an inordinate number of crashes precipitated by structural failure of the 
wings, and ultimately helped to reinforce distrust in the monoplane configuration. 
However, the monoplane began its gradual climb to superiority when in 1915 
Hugo Junkers, at that time the Professor of Mechanics at the Technische Hochschule 
in Aachen, Clermany, designed and built the first all-steel cantilever monoplane in 
history. This initiated a long series of German advancements in cantilever-wing 
monoplanes by both Junkers and Anthony Fokker through the J 920s. In the United 
States, the first widely accepted monoplane was the Ford Trimotor (Fig. l .17) intro· 
duced in l 926; this aircraft helped to establish the civil air transport business in the 
United States. (However, the public's faith in the Ford Trimotor was shaken when the 
Figure l .17 Ford Trimotor, 1926. 

===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
famous Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne was killed on March 31, 1931, in a 
crash of a trimotor.) However, the monoplane configuration really came into its own 
with the Boeing Monomail of 1930, shown in Fig. 1.18. This airplane embodied two 
other important technical developments; it had all-metal, stressed skin construction, 
and its landing gear was retractable. In addition, it was one of the first to use wing 
fillets in an effort to smooth the airflow at the wing-fuselage juncture. The airplane 
you are looking at in Fig. 1.18 is certainly a proper beginning to the era of the mature, 
propeller-driven airplane. 
A major technical development during this era was the National Advisory Com­
mittee for Aeronautics (NACA) cowling for radial piston engines. Such engines have 
their pistons arranged in a circular fashion about the crankshaft, and the cylinders 
themselves are cooled by airflow over the outer finned surfaces. Until 1927, these 
cylinders were usually directly exposed to the main airstream of the airplane, causing 
inordinately high drag. Engineers recognized this problem, but early efforts to en­
close the engines inside an aerodynamically streamlined shroud (a cowling) interfered 
with the cooling airflow, and the engines overheated. One of the earliest aeronautical 
engineers to deal with this problem was Colonel Virginius E. Clark (for whom the 
famous CLARK- Y airfoil is named). Clark designed a primitive cowling in 1922 for 
the Dayton-Wright XPS-1 airplane; it was marginal at best, and besides Clark had 
no proper aerodynamic explanation as to why a cowling worked. The first notable 
progress was made by H. L. Townend at the National Physical Laboratory in England. 
In 1927, Townend designed a ring of relatively short length which wrapped around 
the outside of the cylinders. This resulted in a noticeable decrease in drag, and at 
least it did not interfere with engine cooling. Engine designers who were concerned 
with the adverse effect of a full cowling on engine cooling were more ready to accept 
a ring. The Boeing Monomail was equipped with a Townend ring, which is clearly 
seen in Fig. 1.18. 
However, the major breakthrough in engine cowlings was due to the National 
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics in the United States. Beginning in 1927, at 
the insistence of a group of U.S. aircraft manufacturers, the NACA Langley Memo­
rial Laboratory at Hampton, Virginia, undertook a systematic series of wind tunnel 
tests with the objective of understanding the aerodynamics of engine cowlings and 
designing an effective shape for such cowlings. Under the direction of Fred E. Weick 
at Langley Laboratory, this work quickly resulted in success. Drag reduction larger 
than that with a Townend ring was obtained by the NACA cowling. In 1928, Weick 
Figure 1.18 Boeing Monomail, 1930, with o Townend ring. 
25 

===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
26 Considerations 
airflow between the 
of the Hence, the NACA 
1930s. The 
had a top 185 mi/h. rt was used 
service. In Amelia Earhart and 
aviators of the 1930s-both Lockheed 
of the new era of mature 
the 
Before the 1930s, a weak link in al! 
itself As mentioned Wilbur 
1.19 
the best of both worlds. One 
was the Lockheed 
after 
a classic 
but also its aesthetic 
it will also 
aircraft was the 
that a un.,u,~w~, 
1929, with an 

===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
is essentially a twisted wing oriented in such a fashion that the principal aerodynamic 
force is in the thrust direction. For a propeller of fixed orientation, the twist of the 
propeller is designed so that each airfoil section is at its optimum angle of attack to the 
relative airflow, usually that angle of attack that corresponds to the maximum lift-to­
drag ratio of the airfoil. The relative airflow seen by each airfoil section is the vector 
sum of the forward motion of the airplane and the rotational motion of the propeller. 
Clearly, when the forward velocity of the airplane is changed, the angle of attack 
of each airfoil section changes relative to the local flow direction. Hence, a fixed­
pitch propeller is operating at maximum efficiency only at its design speed; for all 
other speeds of the airplane, the propeller efficiency decreases. This is a tremendous 
disadvantage of a fixed-pitch propeller. Indeed, the Boeing Monomail shown in Fig. 
1.18 had a fixed-pitch propeller, which greatly compromised its performance at off­
design conditions. Because of the reduced thrust from the fixed-pitch propeller, the 
Monomail reached a top speed of only 158 mi/h, partially negating the advantage 
of the reduced drag obtained with its Townend ring and retracted landing gear. Its 
propeller problem was so severe that the Monomail never entered serial production. 
The solution to this problem was to vary the pitch of the propeller during the flight 
so as to operate at near-optimum conditions over the flight range of the airplane-a 
mechanical task easier said than done. The aerodynamic advantage of varying the 
propeller pitch during flight was appreciated as long ago as World War I, and Dr. 
H. S. Hele-Shaw and T. E. Beacham patented such a device in England in 1924. 
However, the first practical' and reliable mechanical device for varying propeller pitch 
was designed by Frank Caldwell of Hamilton Standard in the United States. The 
first production order for Caldwell's design was placed by Boeing in 1933 for use on 
the Boeing 247 transport (Fig. 1.20). The 247 was originally designed in 1932 with 
fixed-pitch propellers. However, when it started flying in early 1933, Boeing found 
that the airplane had inadquate takeoff performance from some of the airports high 
in the Rocky Mountains. By equipping the 247 with variable-pitch propellers, this 
problem was solved. Moreover, the new propellers increased its rate of climb by 22% 
and its cruising velocity by over 5%. To emphasize the impact of this development 
on airplane design, Miller and Sawyer (Ref. 14) stated, "After this demonstration 
of its advantages and its successful service on the 247, no American designer could 
build a high-performance airplane without a variable-pitch propeller." Later in the 
1930s, the variable-pitch propeller, which was controlled by the pilot, 
developed 
Figure 1.20 Boeing 247, 1933. 
27 

===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
28 P A R T 1 e1 Preliminary Considerations 
into the constant-speed propeller, where the pitch was automatically controlled so 
as to maintain constant revolutions per minute (rpm) over the flight range of the 
airplane. Because the power output of the reciprocating engine varies with rotational 
speed, by having a propeller in which the pitch is continuously and automatically 
varied to maintain constant engine speed, the net power output of the engine-propeller 
combination can be maintained at an optimum value. 
Another important advance in the area of propulsion was the development of 
high-octane aviation fuel, although it was eclipsed by the more visibly obvious break­
throughs in the 1930s such as the NACA cowling, retractable landing gear, and the 
variable-pitch propeller. Engine "pinging," an audible local detonation in the engine 
cylinder caused by premature ignition, had been observed as long ago as 1911. An 
additive to the gasoline, tetraethyl lead, was found by C. F. Kettering of General 
Motors Delco to reduce this engine knocking. In tum, General Motors and Standard 
Oil formed a new company, Ethyl Gasoline Corporation, to produce "ethyl" gasoline 
with a lead additive. Later, the hydrocarbon compound of octane was also found to 
be effective in preventing engine knocking. In 1930, the Army Air Corps adopted 87-
octane gasoline as its standard fuel; in 1935, this standard was increased to 100 octane. 
The introduction of 100-octane fuel allowed much higher compression ratios inside 
the cylinder, and hence more power for the engine. For example, the introduction of 
l 00-octane fuel, as well as other technological inprovements, allowed Curtiss-Wright 
Aeronautical Corporation to increase the power of its R-1820 Cyclone engine from 
500 to 1,200 hp in the l 930s-by no means a trivial advancement. 
In subsequent chapters, we will come to appreciate that, when a new airplane is 
designed, the choice of wing area is usually dictated by speed at takeoff or landing 
(or alternatively by the desired takeoff or landing distances along a The 
wing area must be large enough to provide sufficient lift at takeoff or landing; this 
criterion dictates the ratio of airplane weight to wing area, that is, the wing loading 
W / S-one of the most important parameters in airplane performance and design. 
After the airplane has taken off and accelerated to a much higher cruising speed, the 
higher-velocity airflow over the wing creates a larger pressure difference between 
the upper and lower wing surfaces, and hence the lift required to sustain the weight 
of the airplane can be created with a smaller wing area. From this point of view, 
the extra wing area required for takeoff and landing is extra baggage at cruising 
conditions, resulting in higher structural weight and increased skin friction drag. The 
design of airplanes in the era of strut-and-wire biplanes constantly suffered from 
this compromise. However, a partial solution surfaced in the late 1920s and l 
namely, the development of high-lift devices-flaps, slats, etc. Figure 1.21 
illustrates some of the standard devices on aircraft since the 
along with a scale of lift coefficient indicating the reiative increase in lift 
each device. By employing such devices, sufficient lift can be obtained at 
takeoff and landing with wings of smaller area, hence the 
advantage of high wing loadings at cruise. High-lift devices were one of the important 
technical developments during the era of the mature Let us 
examine the history of that development in detaiL 

===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
3.0 
~ 2.5 
E 
~ 
c 
<I) 
~ 2.0 
g 
(.) 
@oouble-slotte~~ 
@Single-slotted fla£?~ ~ 
@splitflap ~ 
@ Plain flap ~ ~@Leading-edges§:::::=-
§ 1.5 /'t';\, 
-~ ~lain airfoil-n0§::::::==-
E 
;g 1.0 
:.;:: 
0.5 
Figure 1.21 Schematic of some basic high-lift devices. 
The basic plain flap (labeled 2 in Fig. 1.21) evolved directly from the trailing­
edge ailerons first used by Henri Farman in the autumn of 1908 in France. However, 
designers of the relatively slow World War I biplanes were not inclined to bother 
with flaps. Plain flaps were first used on the S.E.-4 biplane built by the Royal Aircraft 
Factory in 1914; they became standard on airplanes built by Fairey from 1916 onward. 
Even the pilots of these aircraft rarely bothered to use flaps. 
The single-slotted flap (labeled 5 in Fig. 1.21) was developed around 1920 in­
dependently by three different people in three different places. One person was 
G. V. Lachmann, a young German pilot who ran smoke tunnel tests in 1917 on the 
single-slotted flap and then filed for a patent on the concept. The patent was rejected 
on the basis that the slot would destroy the lift on the wing, rather than enhance it. 
(The reviewers of the patent application did not realize that the high-energy jet of air 
through the slot produced by the higher pressure on the bottom surface and the lower 
pressure on the top surface helped to prevent the boundary layer from separating on 
the top surface, hence increasing lift) The second person to develop the slotted flap 
was Sir Frederick Handley Page in England, who claimed that it im;reased lift by 
60%. When Lachmann in Germany read about Page's work, he convinced Ludwig 
Prandtl at Gottingen University to run wind tunnel tests on the slotted flap. Prandtl, 
29 

===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
30 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
skeptical at first, ran the tests and found a 63% increase in lift. Lachmann got his' 
patent, and he pooled rights with Page in 1921. (Much later, in 1929, Lachmann 
went to work for Handley Page Company.) The third person to develop the slotted 
flat was 0. Mader, an engineer working for Junkers in Germany. Mader first tested 
the concept in a wind tunnel, and then during the period of 1919 to 1921 he made 
flight tests on airplanes equipped with a single-slotted flap. This work was carried 
out independently of either Lachmann or Page. To no surprise, however, when Mader 
applied for a German patent in 1921, it was held to infringe upon Lachmann's patent. 
The viability of the single-slotted flap was finally established beyond a doubt by a 
2-year wind tunnel testing program carried out at the National Physical Laboratory 
(NPL) in England starting in 1920. The NPL data showed that flaps enhanced the lift 
most effectively on thick airfoils, which helped to explain why they were rarely used 
on World War I biplanes with their exceptionally thin airfoil profiles. In spite of the 
favorable NPL data, and the tests by Lachmann, Page, and Mader, single-slotted flaps 
were slow to be implemented. During the 1920s, the only aircraft to be equipped with 
· such flaps were those designed by Page and Lachmann. 
Flap development in the United States was spurred by the invention of the split 
flap (labeled 3 in Fig. 1.21) by Orville Wright in 1920. Working with J.M. H. Jacobs at 
the Army Air Corps's technical laboratory at McCook Field in Dayton, Ohio, Orville 
showed that the split flap increased both lift and drag. The increase in drag is actually 
beneficial during landing; the associated decrease in lift-to-drag ratio L/ D resul:ts 
in a steeper glide slope during landing, hence reducing the overall landing distance. 
Whether or not it had anything to do with nationahstic pride, the first type of flap to 
be used on an airplane designed in the United States was the split flap, and this was 
not until 1932 when Jack Northrop used it on his Northrop Gamma and Lockheed 
Orion designs (Northrop was a designer working for Lockheed in the early 1930s). 
In 1933 Douglas designed the pioneering DC- I with split flaps; the use of such flaps 
carried through to the venerable Douglas DC-3 (Fig. 1.22) in the mid-1930s. By the 
late 1930s, split flaps were being used on most civil and military aircraft. 
The next major advancement in flap development came in 1924, also in the 
United States. Harlan D. Fowler, an engineer with the Army Air Corps, working 
independently as a private venture with his own money, developed the Fowler flap, 
sketched in Fig. 1.23. The Fowler flap combined two advantageous effects. The 
deflection of the flap increast',d the effective camber of the wing, hence increasing 
Figure 1.22 Douglas DC-3, 1935. 

===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
3i 
as the 
, labeled 

===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
32 P A R T 1 e Preliminary Considerations 
number 6. Finally. the triple-slotted Fowler was developed by Boeing for use on 
the 727 jet transport in the l 96(k 
Examine the Douglas DC-3 and the Lockheed L-14 shown in l .22 and 1.24, 
respectively. These airplanes epitomize the mature, propeller-driven aircraft of the 
1930s. Here you see cantilever wing monoplanes powered by radial engines enclosed 
in NACA cowlings, and equipped with variable-pitch propellers. They are all-meta! 
airplanes with retractable landing gear. and use flaps for high lift during takeoff 
and landing. It is for these reasons that the l 930s can be called the golden age of 
aeronautical engineering. 
Three other technical developments of the late I 930s are worth mentioning. One 
is the advent of the p;essurized airplane. Along with the decrease in atmospheric pres­
sure with increasing altitude, there is the concurrent decrease in the volume of oxygen 
necessary for human breathing. Hence, the useful cruising altitude for airplanes was 
limited to about 18,000 ft or lower. Above this altitude for any reasonable length 
of time, a human being would soon lose consciousness due to lack of oxygen. The 
initial solution to the problem of sustained high-altitude flight was the pressure suit 
and the auxiliary oxygen supply breathed through an oxygen mask. The first pilot to 
use a pressure suit was Wiley Post. Looking like a deep-sea diver, Post set an altitude 
record of 55,000 ft in his Lockheed Vega in December 1934. However, this was not 
a practical solution for the average passenger on board an airliner. The answer was 
to pressurize the 
entire passenger cabin of the airplane, so as to provide a shirtsleeve 
environment for the flight crew and passengers. The first airplane to incorporate this 
feature was a specially modified and structurally strengthened Lockheed l OE Electra 
for the Army Air Corps in l 937. Designated the XC-35 (it looked much like the 
Lockheed L-14 in Fig. 1.24), this airplane had a service ceiling of 32,000 ft. It was 
the forerunner of all the modem pressurized airliners of today. 
Along with pressurization for the occupants, high-altitude aircraft needed "pres­
surization" for the engine. Engine power is nearly proportional to the atmospheric 
density; without assistance, engine power simply dropped too low at high altitudes, 
and this was the major mechanical obstacle to high-altitude flight. However, assis­
tance came in the form of the supercharger, a mechanical pump that simply com­
pressed the incoming air before it went into the engine manifold. Supercharger 
development was a high priority during the 1930s and 1940s; it was a major devel­
opment program within NACA. All high-performance military aircraft during World 
War II were equipped with superchargers as a matter of necessity. 
Finally, we mention an interesting development in aerodynamic design which 
took place during the era of the mature, propeller-driven but which was to 
have an unexpected impact well beyond that era. It has to do with the boundary 
on a surface in an airstream-that thin region to the surface where 
the mechanism of air friction is dominant. Ever since Ludwig Prandtl in Germany 
introduced the concept of the boundary layer in 1904, it has been recognized that 
two of flow were possible-laminar flow and turbulent flow-in the boundary 
layer. Moreover, it was known that the friction is for a turbulent boundary 
layer than for a laminar boundary layer. Since mother nature moves toward 
the state of maximum disorder, and turbulent flow is much more disorderly than 

===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
Figure 1.25 North American P-51 Mustang. First production airplane to use a laminar-Row 
wing. 
laminar flow, about 99% of the boundary layer along the wings and fuselage of typ­
ical airplanes in flight is turbulent, creating high skin-friction drag. However, in the 
late 1930s, by means of proper design of the airfoil shape, NACA developed a series of 
laminar-flow ai,foils that encouraged large regions oflaminar flow and reduced airfoil 
drag by almost 50%. Such a laminar-flow wing was quickly adopted in 1940 for the 
design of the new North American P-51 Mustang (Fig. 1.25). However, in practice, 
these wings did not generate the expected large laminar flow. The NACA wind tunnel 
experiments were conducted under controlled conditions using models with highly 
polished surfaces. In contrast, P-51 wings were manufactured with standard surface 
finishes that were rougher than the almost jewellike wind tunnel models. Moreover, 
these wings were further scored and scratched in service. Roughened surfaces en­
courage turbulent flow; even insect smears on the wing can cause the flow to change 
from laminar to turbulent. Hence, in practice, the laminar-flow wing never created the 
large regions oflaminar flow required to produce the desired low level of skin-friction 
drag. However, totally unexpectedly, the laminar-flow airfoil shape turned out to be 
a very good high-speed airfoil. It had a much higher critical Mach number than a 
conventional airfoil did, and hence it delayed the onset of compressibility problems 
encountered by many high-speed airplanes in the early 1940s. A technological de­
velopment from the era of the mature, propeller-driven airplanes resulted instead in 
paving the way for the next era-the era of the jet-wopelled airplane. 
1.2.4 Era of the Jet-Propelled Airplane 
Many types of aircraft gained fame during World War II. Typical of these were the 
Lockheed P-38 Lightning (Fig. 1.26) and the Republic P-47 Thunderbolt (Fig. 1.27) as 
well as the P-51 Mustang (Fig. 1.25). However, these aircraft exhibited no inherently 
new features compared to the mature, propeller-driven airplanes from the late 1930s; 
they were simply more refined and more powerful, with correspondingly improved 
performance. Indeed, virtually all the important airplanes that participated in World 
War II were designed well before the United States entered the war; this includes 
the aircraft in Figs. 1.25 to 1.27. In fact, just a few months before the U.S. entry 
33 

===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
34 PAR T 1 Preliminary Considerations 
1.26 Lockheed P-38 
l.27 P-47 Thunderbolt 
into types was frozen in order to concentrate 
models. The situation was summed up James H. 
of North American 
Aircraft" in the Aeronautical 
far as United States 
charactedzied as 
December 1953: "As 
the Second World War may be 
and refinernent rather 
of the U.S. government relative to 
194 l was to concentrate on the of that 
existed. On the other the Germans and the British had a somewhat 
out of which was born the 
The invention of 
other technical 

===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
CH.L\.PTER The Evolution of the ;md Its Pe,fonnance: A Short 
the of the 
would 
the way toward efficient transonic and 
as a stu-
on 
his 
in it was not until 5 years later that he 
a small company to work 
without the of Whittle's work, Dr. Hans von Ohain in 
a similar gas-turbine support of the famous 
designer Ernst Heinke!, von Ohain started his work in 1936. On 27. 
the He 
flew-it was the first gas airplane 
in It was an but von Ohain's engine of 
838 lb of thrust pushed the He 178 to a maximum speed of 360 mi/h. later, 
invaded and World War H It was not until almost 2 years 
later that a British jet flew. On designed Gloster E.28/39 
airplane took off from It was the first to 
fly with a Whittle and the jet age 
had begun. 
Although the He 178 had flown just before World War 
in the war, it was not until 1944 that a 
That was the Messerschmitt Me 262 
on 18, but Hitler's attempt to convert the fighter to a vengeance bomber, 
problems with the turbojet engines, a fuel and Allied air attacks 
on the aircraft assembly factories combined to delay its appearance in combat until 
September 1944. Powered by two Junkers Jumo 004 turbojets with a thrust of 1984 
lb each, the Me 262 had a maximum speed of 540 mi/h. In total, 1433 Me 262s were 
1.28 jet 1944. 
35 

===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
36 P A R T 1 @ Preliminary Considerations 
produced before the end of the war. It was the first practical 
aircraft. 
The era of jet-propelled aircraft is characterized by a number of design features 
unique to airplanes intended to fly near, at, or beyond the of sound. One of 
the most pivotal of these design features was the advent of the swept wing. For a 
subsonic airplane, sweeping the wing increases the airplane's critical Mach number, 
hence allowing it to fly closer to the speed of sound before encountering the large drag 
rise caused by the generation of shock waves somewhere on the surface of the wing. 
For a supersonic airplane, the wing sweep is designed such that the leading 
edge is inside the Mach cone from the nose of the fuselage; if this is the case, the 
component of airflow velocity perpendicular to the leading edge is subsonic (called a 
subsonic leading edge), and the resulting wave drag is not as severe as it would be if 
the wing were to lie outside the Mach cone. In the latter case, called the supersonic 
leading edge, the component of flow velocity perpendicular to the leading edge is 
supersonic, with an attendant strong shock wave generated at the leading edge. In 
either case, high subsonic or supersonic, an airplane with a swept wing will be able 
to fly faster than one with a straight wing, everything else being equal. 
The concept of the swept wing for high-speed aircraft was first introduced in 
a public forum in 1935. At the fifth Volta Conference, convened on September 30, 
1935, in Rome, Italy, the German aerodynamicist Adolf Busemann gave a paper in 
which he discussed the technical reasons why swept wings would have less drag 
at high speeds than conventional straight wings. Although several Americans 
were 
present, such as Eastman Jacobs from NACA and Theodore von Karman from Cal 
Tech, Busemann's idea went virtually unnoticed; it was not carried back to the United 
States with any sense of importance. Not so in Germany. One year after Busemann 's 
presentation at the Volta Conference, the swept-wing concept was classified by the 
German Luftwaffe as a military secret. The Germans went on to produce a large bulk 
of swept-wing research, including extensive wind tunnel testing. They even designed 
a few prototype swept-wing jet aircraft. Many of these data were confiscated by 
the United States after the end of World War II, and made available to U.S. aircraft 
companies and government laboratories. Meanwhile, quite independently of this 
German research, Robert T. Jones, an NACA aerodynamicist, had worked out the 
elements of swept-wing theory toward the end of the war. Although not reinforced 
by definitive wind tunnel tests in the United States at that time, Jones's work 
served 
as a second source of information concerning the viability of swept wings. 
In 1945, aeronautical engineers at North American Aircraft began the design of 
the XP-86 jet fighter; it had a straight wing. However, the XP-86 design was quickly 
changed to a swept-wing configuration when the German data, as well as some of 
the German engineers, became available after the war. The prototype XP-86 flew on 
October 1, 1947, and the first production P-86A flew with a 35° swept wing on May 
18, 1948. Later designated the F-86, the swept-wing fighter had a top speed of 679 
mi/h, essentially Mach 0.9-a stunning speed for that day. Shown in Fig. l .29, the 
North American F-86 Sabre was the world's first successful swept-wing 
aircraft. (In this author's opinion, the F-86 is asthetically one of the most beautiful 
airplanes ever designed.) 

===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
C H A P r E R 1 9 The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
figure 1.29 
figure l 'JO 
North American F-86 Sabre, 1949. 
Lockheed F-104 Storfigh!er, 1954. The first airplane designed fur sustained Righi 
above Moch 2. 
By the time the F-86 was in operation, the sound barrier had already been broken. 
On October 14, 1947, Captain Charles (Chuck) Yeager became the first human being 
to fly faster than the speed of sound in the Bell X-1 rocket-powered airplane. Eight 
years later, in February 1954, the first fighter airplane capable of sustained flight at 
Mach 2, the Lockheed F-104 Starfighter, made its first appearance. The F-104 (Fig. 
1.30) exhibited the best qualities of good supersonic aerodynamics-a sharp, pointed 
nose, slender fuselage, and extremely thin and sharp wings. The airfoil section on the 
F-104 is less then 4% thick (maximum thickness compared to the chord length). The 
wing leading edge is so sharp that protective measures must be taken by maintenance 
people working around the aircraft. The purpose of these features is to reduce the 
strength of shock waves at the nose and leading edges, hence reducing supersonic 
wave drag. The F-104 also had a straight wing with a very low aspect ratio rather than 
a swept wing. This exhibits an alternative to supersonic airplane designers; the wave 
drag on straight wings of low aspect ratio is comparable to that on swept wings with 
high aspect ratios. Of course, this low-aspect-ratio wing gives poor aerodynamic 
performance at subsonic speeds, but the F-104 was point-designed for maximum 
performance at Mach 2. (This is just another example of the many compromises 
embodied in airplane design.) With the F-104, supersonic flight became an almost 
everyday affair. not just the domain of research aircraft. 
The delta wing concept was another innovation to come out of Germany during 
the 1930s and 1940s. In 1930, Dr. Alexander Lippisch designed a glider with a delta 
31 

===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
38 PA T 1 
frorr; service. 

===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
(Ii) 
(ill 
Fig11re l.31 (a) Convair F· 102, without area rule. (b) Convair F· 102A, with area rule. 
39 

===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
40 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Figure 1.32 
· Figure 1.33 
The de Havilland Comet 1, 1952, the first commerical jet transport. It was 
withdrawn from service in 1954 after three catastrophic in-Right disintegrations. 
Boeing 707, 1958. The first successful commercial jet airliner. 
Comet; reaming the holes for the rivets produced sharp edges. After a number of 
pressurization cycles, cracks in the fuselage began to propagate from these sharp 
edges, leading eventually to catastrophic failure. At the time, de Havilland had a 
massive lead over all other aircraft companies in the design of commercial jet aircraft. 
Moreover, while it was in service, the Comet was very popular with the flying public, 
and it was a money earner for BOAC. Had these failures not occurred, de Havilland 
and England might have become the world's supplier of commercial jet aircraft rather 
than Boeing and the United States. But it was not to be. 
In 1952, the same year as the ill-fated de Havilland Comet went into service, 
the directors of Boeing Company made a bold and risky decision to privately finance 
and build a commercial jet prototype. Designated the model 367-80, or simply called 
the Dash 80 by the Boeing people, the prototype first flew on July 15, 1954. It 
was a bold design which carried over to the.commerical field Boeing's experience 
in building swept-wing jet bombers for the Air Force (the B-47 and later the B-52). 
Later renamed the Boeing 707, the first production series of aircraft were bought by 
Pan American Airlines and went into service in 1958. The Boeing 707 (Fig. 1.33), 
with its swept wings and podded engines mounted on pylons below the wings, set the 
standard design pattern for all future large commercial jets to present day. The design 
of the 707 was evolutionary because it stemmed from the earlier experience at Boeing 
with jet bombers. But it was almost revolutionary in the commercial field, because 
no airliner (not even the Comet) looked like it before. Boeing's risky gamble paid 

===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
CHAPTER • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
off, and it transformed a predominately military airplane company into the world's 
leader in the design and manufacture of commercial jet transports. 
Boeing made another bold move on April 15, 1966, when the decision was made 
to "go for the big one." Boeing had lost the Air Force's C-5 competition to Lockheed; 
the C-5 at the time was the largest transport airplane in the world. Taking their losing 
design a few steps further, Boeing engineers conceived of the 747-the first wide­
body commericaljet transport. Bill Allen, president of Boeing at that time, and Juan 
Trippe, president of Pan American Airlines, shared the belief that the large, wide­
body airplane -offered economic advantages for the future airline passenger market, 
and they both jointly made the decision to pursue the project. This was an even bolder 
decision than that concerning the 707. In thewords of the authoritative aeronautical 
historian James.Hansen (Ref. 15), 
In the opinion of many experts,, the 747 was the greatest gamble in the history of the 
aircraft business. A.t risk were the lives of both companies, as well as the solvency 
of several private lending institutions. 
Financed with private money, if the 7 4 7 had failed, half the banks west of the Mis­
sissippi would have been badly shaken. Another important meaning of big aircraft 
is_ thus clear; big dollars go along with them. 
The gamble paid off. The Boeing 747 (Fig. 1.34) first flew in February 1969, and 
it entered service for the ~rst time in January 1970 on Pan American's New York­
London route. At the time of this writing, some 25 years later, 747s are still being 
produced by Boeing. 
The 747 set the design standard for all subsequent wide-body transports. It has 
done much more. It opened the opportunity for huge numbers of people to fly quickly 
and relatively cheaply across oceans, and to travel to all parts of the globe. The 747 
has had a tremendous sociological impact. It has brought people of various nations 
closer to one another. It has fostered the image of the "global village." It has had 
a direct impact on society, business, and diplomacy in the last third of the twentieth 
century. It is a wonderful example of the extent to which airplane design can favorably 
mold and influence society in general. 
Examine Figs. 1.33 and 1.34; here we see. examples of subsonic and transonic 
commercial airplane designs that are a major part of the era of the jet-propelled 
Figure 1.34 Boeing 747, 1970. 
41 

===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
42 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
aircraft. But what about commercial transportation at supersonic speeds? In the 
1960s this question was addressed in Russia, the United States, England, and France. 
The Tupolev Design Bureau in Russia rushed a supersonic transport design into 
production and service. The Tu-144 supersonic transport first flew on December 31, 
1968. More than a dozen of these aircraft were built, but none entered extended 
service, presumably due to unspecified problems. One Tu-144 was destroyed in a 
dramatic accident at the 1973 Paris Air Show. In the United States, the government 
orchestrated a design competition for a supersonic transport; the Boeing 2707 was 
the winner in December 1966. The design turned into a nightmare for Boeing. For 2 
years, a variable-sweep wing supersonic transport (SST) configuration was pursued, 
and then the designwas junked. Starting at the beginning again in 1969, the design 
was caught up in an upward spiral of increased weight and development costs. When 
the predictions for final development costs hit about $5 billion, Congress stepped 
in and refused to appropriate any more funds. In May 1971, the SST development 
program 
in the United States was terminated. Only in England and France was the 
SST concept carried to fruition. 
The first, and so far only, supersonic commercial transport to see long-term, 
regular service is the Anglo-French Concorde (Fig. 1,35). In 1960 both the British and 
French independently initiated 
design studies for a supersonic transport. It quickly 
became apparent that the technical complexities and financial costs were beyond 
the abilities of either country to shoulder alone. Hence, on November 29, 1962, 
England and France signed a formal treaty aimed at the design and construction 
of a supersonic transport. (By the way, this reality is becoming more and more a 
part of modem airplane design; when certain projects exceed the capability of a given 
company or even a given country, the practical solution is sometimes found in national 
or international consortia. It might be worthwhile for future airplane designers in the 
United States to learn to speak French, German, or Japanese.) The product of this 
treaty was the Aerospatiale-British Aerospace Corporation's Concorde. Designed 
to cruise at Mach 2.2 carrying 125 passengers, the Concorde first flew on March 
2, 1969. It first exceeded Mach 1 on October 1, 1969, and Mach 2 on November 
4, 1970. Originally, orders for 74 Concordes were anticipated. However, when the 
airlines were expected to place orders in 1973, the world was deep in the energy crises. 
The skyrocketing costs of aviation jet fuel wiped out any hope of an economic return 
from flying the Concorde, ahd no orders were placed. Only the national airlines of 
France and Britain, Air France and British Airways, went ahead, each signing up for 
Figure 1.35 The Concorde supersonic transport, 1972. 

===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
seven aircraft after considerable pressure from their respective governments. After 
a long development program, the Concorde went into service on January 21, 1976. 
In the final analysis, the Concorde was a technical, if not financial, success. It has 
been in regular service since 1976. It represents an almost revolutionary (rather than 
evolutionary) airplane design in that no such aircraft existed before it. However, 
the Concorde designers were not operating in a vacuum. Examining Fig. 1.35, we 
see a supersonic configuration which incorporates good supersonic aerodynamics­
a sharp-nosed slender fuselage and a cranked delta wing with a thin airfoil. The 
Concorde designers had at least 15 years of military airplane design experience with 
such features to draw upon. Today, we know that any future second-generation SST 
will have to be economical in service and environmentally acceptable. The design 
of such a vehicle is one of the great challenges in aeronautics. Perhaps some of the 
readers of this book will someday play a part in meeting this challenge. 
Today, we are still in the era of the jet-propelled airplane, and we will be there 
for the indefinite future. The evolution of this er:a can be seen at a glance just by 
flipping through Figs., l.28 to 1.35. Here we see subsonic jet planes, some with 
straight wings and others with swept wings, all with high aspect ratios. We also see 
supersonic jet planes, some with straight wings and others with delta wings, all with 
low aspect ratios. In their time, the designs of all these airplanes ·were driven by the 
quest for speed and altitude, mitigated in some cases by the realities of economic and 
environmental constraints. In the future, we will continue the quest for speed and 
altitude, while at the same time these constraints (and possibly others) will become 
even more imposing. In the process, the challenges to be faced by future afrplane 
designers will only become more interesting. 
1.3 UNCONVENTIONAL DESIGNS (INNOVATIVE 
CONCEPTS) 
We end this chapter with a mention, albeit brief, of the design of certain aircraft that do 
not "fit the mold" of previous, conventional airplanes, that is, unconventional airplane 
designs. Section 1.2 focused on airplanes that set the standard for airplane design­
airplanes that came to be accepted as representative of the conventional airplane. 
However, this is not to downgrade the importance of unconventional thinking for the 
design of new aircraft that look different and/or fly differently. A case can be made 
that George Cayley's conceptofwhat today we call uie modem configuration airplane 
(Fig. 1.6) was, in its time, quite "linc.onventional" when viewed against the panorama 
of flapping-wing omiiliopterconcepts that precededk For this reason, we might also 
entitle this section "Inno¥ative Concepts," because most unconventional designs are 
derived from innovative thinking. · 
Airplanes that take off and land vertically are unconventional airplanes. Any 
such airplane is classified as a vertical-takeoff-and-landing (VTOL) airplane. (We are 
considering fixed-wing VTOL airplanes here, not helicopters, which are a completely 
different consideration.) One of the best examples of a successful VTOL airplane, 
43 

===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
PART Considerations 
one that has been in continuous service since the l is the Harrier 
fighter aircraft, shown in Fig. 1.36. The Harrier is a British first conceived 
Hawker Aircraft, a prototype called the P- l 227 Kestrel first flew in l 960. 
the production version, called the was built in numbers for the 
Force and the Roya! Navy. A version of the Harrier, the 
manufactured by McDonnell-Douglas in the United States in the 
is in service with the U.S. Marine There are many ,irn-.rn,,w'hPc 
vertical thrust for a VTOL craft. In the case of the 
single Rolls-Royce Pegasus passes two located on 
each side of the engine. Vanes in these nozzles deflect the exhaust in the downward, 
vertical direction for vertical takeoff and 
and in the backward 
direction for forward 
Another unconventional airplane concept is From a aero-
dynamic viewpoint, a fuselage is mainly a drag-producing element of the airplane; 
its lift-to-drag ratio is much smaller than that of a wing. Hence, if the whole airplane 
were simply one big wing, the maximum efficiency could be achieved. 
The idea for such flying wings is not new. For exampie, the famous airplane designer 
Jack Northrop began working with flying-wing designs in the 1930s. During 
and just after World War II, Northrop built several flying-wing bombers. A photo­
graph of one, the YB-49 jet bomber, is shown in Fig. l .37. However, the longitudinal 
stability and control normally provided the horizontal tail and elevator at the end 
of a fuselage of a conventional airplane must instead be provided flaps and unusual 
curvature of the camber line near the trailing edge of the flying wing. This caused 
stability and control problems for flying-wing aircraft-problems severe enough that 
no practical wings were produced until recently. In the modern aeronautical 
engineering of today, airplanes can be designed to be unstable, and the airplane is 
flown with the aid of a computer that is constantly deflecting the control surfaces 
to keep the airplane on its intended flight path-the fly-by-wire concept. Such new 
figure 1.36 The Hawker Siddeley Harrier, 1969, the first production 
vertical-takeoff-and-landing airp!ane. 

===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
CHAPTER 1 The Evoiution the and Its Performance: A Short 
U7 1948. 
now make and of flying 
modem example, the is discussed next 
unconventional aircraft has come on the scene in recent years, 
the objective is to have the smailest 
radar 
cross section virtually invisible on any 
radar screen. Two modern stealth are shown in 1.38 and 
the B-2 and Lockl1eed F-117, Look at these aircraft-
you with and flat all designed to 
reflect radar waves away from the source rather than back toward it. Moreover, these 
are made of special materiaL The features you see 
1.38 and 1.39 are dictated and not 
considerations. Good subsonic aerodnamic is embodied by 
rounded leading surfaces, and streamlined shapes. 
You do not see these features in the B-2 and F-117. Here is an extreme example of the 
r-n,,rnnnunN,,~ that face design concern for 
these stealth aircraft is very low radar cross section; had to take 
a 
back seat. Sometimes these are referred to as designed 
by electrical engineers." This is not far from the truth. However, the fact that both 
the B-2 and the F-117 have that the 
solved a very difficult problem-that 
features with the aeronautical engineering 
in reference to the previous 
45 

===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
46 PART Preliminary Considerations 
figure 1.38 Northrop B-2 Siealth bomber. (Courtesy of Northrop-Grumman Corporation.) 
Figure 1.39 Lockheed f- 11 7 Stealth fighter. 
paragraph, note that the B-2 is indeed a flying wing. made possible by the advanced 
fly-by-wire technology of today. 
There are many other unconventional concepts for airplanes, too numerous for 
us to treat in any detail. For example, since the 1930s, the concept of a combined 
automobile and airplane-the come and gone several times, without 

===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
C H A P T E R l • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
Figure 1.40 The Voyager, the first airplane to Ay around 
the world without refueling, 1986. 
any real success. Another idea, one that has been relatively successful, is the ultralight 
airplane-essentially an overgrown kite or parafoil, with a chair for the pilot and an 
engine equivalent to that of a lawn mower for power. These ultralights are currently 
one of the latest rages at the time of this writing. Another concept, not quite as 
unconventional, is the uninhabited air vehicle (UAV), an updated label for what 
used to be called a remotely piloted vehicle (RPV). For the most part, these UAVs 
are essentially overgrown model airplanes, although some recent UAV designs for 
high-altitude surveillance are large aircraft with very high-aspect-ratio wings, and 
wingspans on the. order of 80 ft. And ,then there are airplanes that are so narrowly 
point-designed that they are good for only one thing, and this makes such airplanes 
somewhat unconventional. A case ~n point is the Voyager designed by Burt Rutan, 
and flown by Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager in their record nonstop flight around the 
world, finishing on December 23, 1986. The Voyager is shown in Fig. 1.40; the 
airplane you see here is a somewhat unconventional configuration for a somewhat 
unconventional purpose. 
1.4 SUMMARY AND THE FUTURE 
With all the previous discussion in mind, return to Fig. 1.3, showing the Wright Flyer 
on its way toward historic destiny. That flight took place less than 100 years ago-a 
scant speck in the whole time line of recorded history. The exponential growth of 
aeronautical technology that has taken place since 1903 is evident just by leajing 
through the remaining figures in this chapter. In retrospect, 
the only adjective that 
47 

===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
48 PART @ Preliminary Considerations 
can properly describe this progress is Indeed. there are those who 
describe aeronautics as a mature This may be so, but as a 
mature person is in the best position to decide his or her own future the 
mature aeronautical technology of today is in its best position ever to determine its 
destiny in the twenty-first century. I envy the readers of this book who will influence 
and guide this destiny. 
A case in point is hypersonic flight the iate 1980s and 
on hypersonic airplanes was vigoro1.Js!y· carried out in several countries, 
United States. The U.S. effort was focused on the concept of an aerospace 
an aircraft that would take off from a normal runway as a normal airplane 
and then accelerate to near-orbital within the 
propulsion (in this case, supersonic combustion 
this work was intended to produce an experimental flight vehicle. the X-30 
(Fig. 1.41 ). Although much technical progress was made during this the 
program floundered because of the projected enormous cost to bring it to the actual 
flight vehicle stage. However, in this author's opinion. this hiatus is just temporary. 
If the history of flight has told us anything, it has shown us that aeronautics has 
always been paced by the concept of faster and higher. Although this has to be 
somewhat mitigated today by the need for economically viable and envirnnmentally 
safe airplanes, the overall march of progress in aeronautics will continue to be faster 
and higher. In some sense, practical, everyday flight may be viewed as 
the final frontier of aeronautics. This author feels that most young readers of this 
book will see, in their lifetime in the twenty-first century, much pioneering progress 
toward this final frontier. 
And hypersonic flight is not the only challenge for the future. As long as civiliza­
tion as we know it today continues to exist in the world, we always design and 
build new and improved airplanes for all the regimes of flight-low-speed, subsonic, 
Figure 1.41 Artist's sketch of the X-30, a !ransatmospheric hypersonic vehicle. 

===== PDF PAGE 63 =====
C H A P T E R 1 • The Evolution of the Airplane and Its Performance: A Short History 
transonic, supersonic, and hypersonic. From our viewpoint at the end of the twentieth 
century, we see unlimited progress and opportunities in the enhancement of airplane 
performance and design in the twenty-first century, and you will be in a position to 
be part of this action. 
The stage is now set for the remainder of this book. The principles of airplane 
performance and design discussed in the following chapters will give you a better 
appreciation of past airplane designs, an understanding of present designs, and a 
window into future designs. If you are interested in obtaining such appreciation and 
understanding, and if you are anxious to jump through the window into the future, 
simply read on. 
49 

===== PDF PAGE 64 =====
chapl'er 
Aerodynamics of the Airplane: 
The Drag Polar 
The results which we reach by practical flying experiments will depend most of an 
upon the shapes which we give to the wings used in experimenting. Therefore, there 
is probably no more important subject in the technics of flying than that which refers 
to wing formation. 
Otto Lilienthal, Berlin, 1896 
2. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Without aerodynamics, airplanes could not fly, birds could not get off the ground, 
and windmills would never work. Thus, in considering the performance and design 
of airplanes, it is no surprise that aerodynamics is a vital aspect. That is why this 
chapter is devoted exclusively to aerodynamics. Our purpose here is not to give a 
short course in aerodynamics; rather, only those aspects of aerodynamics necessary 
for our subsequent consideration of airplane performance and design are reviewed 
and discussed. Moreover, an understanding of what constitutes "good aerodynamics" 
is central to the design of good airplanes. In the following sections we discuss the lift 
and drag of various components of the airplane, as well as the overall lift and drag 
of the complete vehicle. We emphasize the philosophy that good aerodynamics is 
primarily derived from low drag; it is generally not hard to design a surface to give 
the requisite amount of lift, and the challenge is to obtain this lift with as small a drag 
as possible. A barn door at the angle of attack will produce a lot of lift, but it also 
produces a lot of drag-this is why we do not fly around on barn doors. 
51 

===== PDF PAGE 65 =====
P A R T 1 @ Preliminary Considerations 
2.2 THE SOURCE OF AERODYNAMIC FORCE 
Grab hold of this book with both hands, and lift it into the air. You are exerting a 
force on this book, and the force is being communicated to the book because your 
hands are in direct contact with the cover of the book. Similarly, the aerodynamic 
force exerted on a body immersed in an airflow is due to the two hands of nature 
which are in direct contact with the surface of the body; these two hands of nature 
are the pressure and shear stress distributions acting all over the exposed surface of 
the body. The pressure and shear stress distributions exerted on the surface of an 
airfoil due to the airflow over the body are sketched qualitatively in Fig. 2.1; pressure 
acts locally perpendicular to the surface, and shear stress acts locally parallel to the 
surface. The net aerodynamic force on the body is due to the pressure and shear 
stress distributions integrated over the total exposed surface area. Let us make this 
idea more quantitative. Let point A be any point on the surface of the body in Fig. 2.2. 
Let n and k be unit vectors normal and tangent, respectively, to the surface at point 
A, as shown in Fig. 2.2; also let d S be an infinitesimally small segment of surface 
area surrounding point A. If p and r are the local pressure and shear stress at point 
A, then the resultant aerodynamic force R on the body can be written as 
R=-f f pndS+ ff rkdS 
s 
Force due 
to pressure 
s 
Force due 
to friction 
The two hands of nature that grab the body 
[2.1] 
where the integrals in Eq. (2.1) are surface integrals. It is always useful to keep in 
mind that, no matter how complex the flow may be, or what the shape of the body 
may be, the only two sources of aerodynamic force felt by the body are the integral 
of the perssure over the surface and the integral of the shear stress over the surface; 
that is, the first and secorid terms, respectively, in Eq. (2.1 ). 
p = p(s) 
(a) Pressure distribution (schematic only; distorted for clarity) 
T = T(S) 
~' ~:.~ 
T T T 
(b) Shear stress distribution 
2. i {a) Schematic of lhe pressure distributior-i over on airfoil. Nole: The relative magnitudes of the 
pressure, signified by the length of each arrow, ore distorted in this sketch for the sake of clarity. In 
reality, for low speed subsonic Aighl, the minimum pressure is usually only a few percent below the 
freestreom pressure. (b) Shear stress distribution. 

===== PDF PAGE 66 =====
CMAPTER 2 0 of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
2.2 Sketch of rhe uni! vectors. 
AERODYNAMIC LIFT, DRAG, MOMENTS 
Consider the body sketched in Fig. 2.3, oriented at an angle of attack a to the free­
stream direction. The free-stream velocity is denoted V 00 and is frequently called 
the relative wind. The resultant aerodynamic force R, given by (2.1 ), is inclined 
rearv,;ard from the vertical, as shown in Fig. 2.3. (Note that, in general, R is not 
perpendicular to the chord line. There were several investigators during the nineteenth 
century who assumed that the resultant force was perpendicular to the 
chord; some definitive measurements Otto Lilienthal in 1890 were the 
first to prove that such an By the component of R 
perpendicular to the free-stream velocity is the lift and the component of R parallel 
to the free-stream direction is the D. 
For the body shown in Fig. 2.3, that you place an axis perpendicular 
to the page at any on the body. Just for the sake of discussion, we 
choose the of the distance behind the edge, measured along 
the chord line, as shown in Fig. 2.4a. This is called the point; 
there is nothing inherently magic about this choice-we could just as well choose 
any other on the body. Now imagine that the axis perpendicular to the page 
through the is rigidly attached to the and that you suspend the body in 
an airstream, holding the axis with your hand. Due to the pressure and shear stress 
distributed all over the surface of the body, there will be a tendency for the axis to 
twist in your hand; that there will be in general a moment about the axis. (See 
l of Ref. 16 for the integral due to pressure and shear stress 
which create this moment.) In this case, since the axis is located at the quarter-
chord we call such a moment the moment about the quarter chord, If 
we had chosen instead to the axis at the edge, as shown in 2.4b, 
then we would still feel a. action, but it would be a magnitude 
from above. In this case, we would the moment about the leading edge 
· even the surface pressure and shear stress distributions are the same 
53 

===== PDF PAGE 67 =====
54 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Figure 2.3 
Figure 2.4 
Lift, drag, and resultant aerodynamic force. 
Mc14 
J 
c/4 
~~~~~~~~~~c~~~~~~~~_.., 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Moment about the quarter-chord point. (b) Moment 
about the leading edge. 
for parts (a) and (b) in Fig. 2.4, MLE is different from Mc;4 simply because we have 
chosen a different point about which to take the moments. Important: By convention, 
a moment which tends to rotate the body so as to increase the angle of attack is 
considered positive. The moments shown in Fig. 2.4 are drawn in the positive sense; 
that is, they tend to pitch the nose upward. Depending on the shape of the body, the 
moments can be either positive or negative. (In reality, for the positively cambered 
airfoil shown in Fig. 2.4, the moments will be pitch-down moments; that is, Mc;4 and 
M LE will be negative values and will act in the opposite direction from that shown in 
Fig. 2.4.) 

===== PDF PAGE 68 =====
C H A P T E R 2 ® Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
0 
At what point on the body do the lift and drag act? For ex:iimple, when 
we draw the lift and drag forces on a body such as in Figo through what point 
on the should we draw these forces? To address this question, we note that the 
two hands of nature which grab the body-the pressure and shear stress distributions 
acting over the surface-are distributed loads which are impressed over the whole 
surface, such as sketched in Figo 2.1. The net effect of these distributed loads is the 
production of the resultant concentrated force R, and hence the lift and drag, as shown 
in Fig. 2.3. In other words, the distributed loads create an aerodynamic force on the 
body, and we this force as to a single concentrated force vector 
R, applied at a on the body if nature were touching the body with only one 
finger at that instead of grabbing it all over the complete surface, as happens in 
This leads back to our original question: Through what point on the body should 
the single concentrated force R be drawn? One obvious answer would be to plot the 
distributed load on graph paper and find the centroid of this load, just as you would 
find the centroid of an area from integral calculus. The centroid of the distributed 
load on the is the point through which the equivalent concentrated force acts. 
This point is called the center of pressure. The complete mechanical effect of the 
distributed aerodynamic load over the body can be exactly represented by the resultant 
force R ( or equivalently 
the lift and drag) acting through the center of pressure. This 
is illustrated in Fig. 2.5. The actual distributed load is sketched in Fig. 2.5a. The 
mechanical effect of this distributed load is equal to the resultant lift and drag acting 
through the center of pressure, denoted c.p., as shown in Fig. 2.5b. If we were to 
place an axis to the page going through the center of pressure, there 
would be no moment about the axis. Hence, an alternate definition of the center of 
pressure is that point on the body about which the moment is zero. 
However, we do not have to end here. Once we accept that the mechanical effect 
of the distributed load can be exactly represented by a concentrated force acting at the 
center of pressure, then we know from the principles of statics that the concentrated 
load can be shifted to any other part on the body, as long as we also specify the 
moments about that other point. For example. in Fig. 2.5c the lift and drag are shown 
acting through the quarter-chord point, with a moment acting about the quarter-chord 
point, namely, The mechanical effect of the distributed load in Fig. 2.5a can be 
exactly represented by a concentrated force acting at the quarter-chord point along 
with the specification of the moment about that point. Yet another choice might be 
to draw the lift and acting through the leading edge along with a specification of 
the moment about the leading edge, as sketched in Fig. 2.5d. 
In summary, all four sketches shown in Figo 2.5 are equivalent and proper rep­
resentations of the same mechanical effect Therefore, you should fee! comfortable 
any of them For in airplane dynamics, the center of pressure is 
rarely used because it shifts when the angle of attack is changed. Instead, for airfoil 
aerodynamics. the concentrated force is frequently drawn at the quarter-chord point 
Another choice frequently made is to apply the concentrated force at the aerodynamic 
center, a on the which we will define shortly. 
55 

===== PDF PAGE 69 =====
56 
Example 2.1 
P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
L 
c.p. 
(a) Distributed load (b) Concentrated force acting 
through the center of pressure 
Figure 2.5 
L 
(c) Concentrated force acting through 
the quarter-chord point, plus the 
moment about the quarter-chord point 
L 
(d) Concentrated force acting through 
the leading edge, plus the moment about 
the leading edge 
Three ways of representing the actual distributed load exerted by 
pressure a.nd shear stress on the surface of the airfoil by a 
concentrated force at a point and the moment at that point. 
For a given set of free-stream conditions and angle of attack, the lift per unit span for a given 
airfoil is 200 pounds per foot (lb/ft). The location of the center of pressure is at 0.3c, where 
c is the chord length; c = 5 ft. The force and moment system on the airfoil can be shown as 
sketched in Fig. 2.5b, namely, the aerodynamic force of 200 lb acting through the center of 
pressure, which is located at 0.3c, with no moment about the center of pressure (by definition). 
What would the equivalent force and moment system be if the lift were placed at the quarter­
chord point? At the leading edge? (Assume that the line of action of the drag Dis close enough 
to the quarter-chord and leading-edge points that any moment about these points due to drag 
is negligible.) 

===== PDF PAGE 70 =====
C H A P T E R 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Solution 
Consider the quarter-chord point. The moment about the quarter-chord point is given by the 
lift acting through the center of pressure, with the moment arm 0.3c - 0.25c = 0.05c. This 
moment is 
Mc;4 = -(0.05c)(200) = -lOc = -10(5) = -50 ft-lb per unit span 
Note: Moments which cause a pitch-down motion (a decrease in angle of attack) are, by 
convention, negative. For the case above, the moment about the quarter-chord point causes a 
pitch-down action; hence it is a negative moment. The direction of this negative moment is the 
opposite direction from the arrow shown in Fig. 2.5c; that is, the moment calculated here is in 
the counterclockwise direction. 
The equivalent force and moment system is shown in Fig. 2.5c, where the lift of 200 lb acts 
through the quarter-chord point, and a moment equal to -50 ft-lb exists about the quarter-chord 
point. 
Consider the leading edge point. The moment about the leading edge point is given by 
the lift acting through the center of pressure, with the moment arm 0.3c. This moment is 
MLE = -(0.3)(200) = -60c = -60(5) = -300 ft-lb per unit span 
The equivalent force and moment system is shown in Fig. 2.5d, where the lift of 200 lb acts 
through the leading edge point and a moment equal to -300 ft-lb exists about the leading edge 
point. 
2.4 AERODYNAMIC COEFFICIENTS 
The aerodynamic characteristics of a body are more fundamentally described by the 
force and moment coefficients than by the actual forces and moments themselves. Let 
us explain why. 
Intuition, if nothing else, tells us that the aerodynamic force on a body depends 
on the velocity of the body through the air V 00 , the density of the ambient air p00 , the 
size of the body, which we will denote by an appropriate reference area S, and the 
orientation of the body relative to the free-stream direction, for example, the angle of 
attack a. (Clearly, if we change the velocity, the aerodynamic force should change. 
Also, the force on a body moving at 100 feet per second (ft/s) through air is going 
to be smaller than the force on the same body moving at 100 ft/s through water, 
which is nearly a thousand times denser than air. Also, the aerodynamic force on a 
sphere of 1-inch (1-in) diameter is going to be smaller than that for a sphere of 1-ft 
diameter, everything else being equal. Finally, the force on a wing will dearly depend 
on how much the wing is inclined to the flow. All these are simply commonsense 
items.) Moreover, since friction accounts for part of the aerodynamic force, the force 
should depend on the ambient coefficient of viscosity µ 00 • Not quite so intuitive, but 
important nonetheless, is the compressibility of the medium through which the body 
moves. A measure of the compressibility of a fluid is the speed of sound in the fluid 
a00 ; the higher the compressibility, the lower the speed of sound. Hence, we can 
57 

===== PDF PAGE 71 =====
58 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
readily state the following relations for lift, drag, and moments of a body of given 
shape: 
L = L(p00 , V00 , S, a, µ 00 , Goo) 
D = D(Poo, Voo, S, a, µoo, Goo) 
M = M(p00 , V00 , S, a, µ 00 , Goo) 
[2.2a] 
[2.2b] 
[2.2c] 
With the above in mind, iet us go through the following thought experiment. 
Assume we want to find out how the lift on a given body varies with the parameters 
given in Eq. (2.2a). We could first run a series of wind tunnel tests in which the 
velocity is varied and everything else is kept the same. From this, we would obtain a 
stack of wind tunnel data from which we could extract how L varies with V00 • Then 
we could run a second series of wind tunnel tests in which the density is changed and 
everything else is kept the same. From this we would obtain a second stack of wind 
tunnel data from which we'could correlate L with p00 • We could continue to run wind 
tunnel tests, varying in tum each one of the other parameters on the right-hand side 
of Eq. (2.2a), and obtain more stacks of wind tunnel data. When finished, we would 
have six· separate stacks of wind tunnel data to correlate in order to find out how the 
lift varies for the given aerodynamic shape. This could be very time-consuming, and 
moreover, the large amount of wind tunnel time could be quite costly. However, there 
is a better way. Let us define the lift, drag, and moment coefficients for a given body, 
denoted by CL, Cn, and CM, respectively, as follows: 
L CL=-­
qooS 
D 
Cv=-­qooS 
M CM=-­qooSC 
where q00 is the dynamic pressure, defined as 
1 2 
qoo = 2pV00 
[2.3] 
[2.4] 
[2.5] 
[2.6] 
and c is a characteristic length of a body (for an airfoil, the usual choice for c is the 
chord length). Let us define the following similarity parameters: 
Poo Vooc Reynolds number (based on chord length): Re = [2.7] 
µ00 
Voo Mach number: M 00 = - [2.8] 
Goo 
The method of dimensional analysis-a very powerful and elegant approach used to 
identify governing nondimensional parameters in a physical problem-leads to the 

===== PDF PAGE 72 =====
c H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
following result. For the give body shape, we have 
CL= fi(a, Re, Moo) 
Cv = fz(a, Re, Moo) 
CM = !J(a, Re, M00 ) 
[2.9a] 
[2.9&] 
[2.9c] 
[See chapter 5 of Ref. 3 and chaper 1 of Ref. 16 for a discussion of dimensional 
analysis and a derivation of Eqs. (2.9a) to (2.9c).] These results from dimensional 
analysis greatly simplify things for us. For example, let us once again go through 
our thought experiment in which we want to find out how lift on a given body varies: 
However, this time, in light of the results from Eq. (2.9a), we use the lift coefficient, 
not the lift itself, as the primary item. We could run a series of wind tunnel tests in 
which we obtain the lift coefficient as a function of a, keeping Re and M00 constant. 
In so doing, we would obtain a stack of wind tunnel data. Then we could run a 
second series of tests.where Re is varied, keeping a and M00 constant. This would 
give us a second stack of wind tunnel data. Finally, we could run a third series of 
wind tunnel tests in which M 00 is varied, keeping a and Re constant. This would give 
us a third stack of data. With only these three stacks of data, We could find out how 
CL varies. This is a tremendous savings in time and money over our previous thought 
experiment, in which we generated six stacks of data to find out how L varies. 
The above thought experiment is only one aspect of the value of CL , C v, and CM. 
They have a more fundamental value, as follows. Take Eq. (2.9a), for example. This 
relationship shows that lift coefficient is a function of the angle of attack, Reynolds 
number, and Mach number. Imagine that we have a given body at a given angle of 
attack in a given flow, where p00 , V00 , µ 00 , and a00 are certain values. Let us call 
this the "green" flow. Now, consider another body of the same geometric shape (but 
not the same size) in another flow where p00 , V00 , µ 00 , and a00 are all different; let 
us call this flow the "red" flow. 
Dimensional analysis, from Eq. (2.9a), tells us that even though the green flow 
and the red flow are two different flows, if the Reynolds number and the Mach number 
are the same for these two different flows, then the lift coefficient will be the same 
for the two geometrically similar ho.dies at the same angle of attack. If this is the 
case, then the two flows, the green flow and the red flow, are called dynamically 
similiar flows. This is powerful stuff! The essence of practical wind tunnel testing 
is built on the concept of dynamically similar flows. Say we want to obtain the lift, 
drag, and moment coefficients for the Boeing 747 flying at an altitude of 30,000 ft 
with a Mach number of0.8. If we place a small-scale model of the Boeing 747 in a 
wind tunnel at the same angle of attack as the real airplane in flight, and if the flow 
conditions in the test section of the wind tunnel are such that the Reynolds number 
and Mach number are the same as for the real airplane in actual flight, then the lift, 
drag, and moment coefficients measured in the wind tunnel will be exactly the same 
values as those for the full-scale airplane in free flight. This principle has been a 
driving force in the design of wind tunnels. The ideal wind tunnel is one in which 
the proper Reynolds and Mach numbers 
corresponding to actual flight are simulated. 
This is frequently very difficult to achieve; hence most wind tunnel designs focus on 
59 

===== PDF PAGE 73 =====
60 
Example 2.2 
P A R T l • Preliminary Considerations 
the proper simulation of either one or the other-the simulation of either the high 
Reynolds numbers associated with flight or the proper Mach numbers. This is why 
most new airplane designs are tested in more than one wind tunnel. 
A comment is in order regarding the reference area Sin Eqs. (2.3) to (2.5). This 
is nothing other than just a reference area, suitably chosen for the definition of the 
force and moment coefficients. Beginning students in aerodynamics frequently want 
to think that S should be the total wetted area of the airplane. (Wetted area is the 
actual surface area of the material making up the skin of the airplane-it is the total 
surface area that is in actual contact with, i.e., wetted by, the fluid in which the body 
is immersed.) Indeed, the wetted surface area is the surface on which the pressure 
and shear stress distributions are acting; hence it is a meaningful geometric quantity 
when one is discussing aerodynamic force. However, the wetted surface area is not 
easily calculated, especially for complex body shapes. In contrast, it is much easier 
to calculate the planform area of a wing, that is, the projected area that we see when 
we look down on the wing. For this reason, for wings as well as entire airplanes, 
the wing planform area is usually used as Sin the definitions of CL, Co, and CM 
from Eqs. (2.3) to (2.5). Similarly, if we are considering the lift and drag of a cone, 
or some other slender, missile like body, then the reference area Sin Eqs. (2.3) to 
(2.5) is frequently taken as the base area of the body. The point here is that Sin 
Eqs. (2.3) to (2.5) is simply a reference area that can be arbitrarily specified. This is 
done primarily for convenience. Whether we take for S the planform area, base area, 
or any other area germane to a given body shape, it is still a measure of the relative 
size of different bodies which are geometrically similar. And what is important in 
the definition of CL, CO , and CM is to divide out the effect of size via the definitions 
given by Eqs. (2.3) to (2.5). The moral to this story is as follows: Whenever you take 
data for CL, Co, or CM from the technical literature, make certain that you know 
what geometric reference area was used for Sin the definitions and then use that same 
defined area when making calculations involving those coefficients. 
The Boeing 777 (Fig. 1.2) has a wing planform area of 4605 square feet (ft2). (a) Assuming a 
takeoff weight of 506,000 lb and a takeoff velocity of 160 mi/h, calculate the lift coefficient at 
takeoff for standard sea-level conditions. (b) Compare the above result with the lift coefficient 
for cruise at Mach number 0.83 at 30,000 ft, assuming the same weight. 
Solution 
(a) For steady, level flight, the weight is equal to the lift. Hence, from Eq. (2.3), 
L W CL=-=-' qooS qooS 
The velocity must be expressed in consii,tent units. Since 60 mi/h = 88 ft/s (a convenient factor 
to remember), 
V00 = 160 (:) = 234.7 ft/s 

===== PDF PAGE 74 =====
CHAPTER 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
From Appendix B, at standard sea level, p00 = 0.002377 slug per cubic foot (slug/ft 3 ), so 
qoo = _!_Poo V 2 = _!_ (0.002377)(234.7) 2 = 65.45 !b/ft2 
2 00 2 
Thus, 
W 506,000 ~ 
CL = q00 S = (65.45)(4,605) = ~ 
(b) At 30,000 ft, from Appendix B, p00 = 8.907 x 10- 4 slug/ft 3 and T00 = 4l l.86°R. The 
speed of sound is 
a 00 = Jy RT = J (l .4)(], 716)(411.86) = 994.7 ft/s 
V00 = a00 M00 = (994.7)(0.83) = 825.6 ft/s 
l 1 
qoo = 2. Poo V! = 2. (8.907 x 10-4 )(825.6) 2 = 303.56 lb/ft2 
CL=~= 506,000 =~ 
q00 S (303.56)(4,605) ~ 
Note: The lift coefficient at the much higher cruise velocity is much smaller than that at takeoff, 
even though the density at 30,000 ft is smaller than that at sea level. It is sometimes convenient 
to think that the lift at high speeds is mainly obtained from the high dynamic pressure; hence 
only a small lift coefficient is required. In turn, at low speeds the dynamic pressure is lower, 
and in order to keep the lift equal to the weight in steady, level flight, the low dynamic pressure 
must be compensated by a high lift coefficient. 
DESIGN CAMEO 
As we will discuss in subsequent sections, the lift 
coefficient for a given aerodynamic shape is an 
intrinsic value of the shape itself, the inclination of 
the body to the free-stream direction (the angle of 
attack), the Mach number, and the Reynolds number. 
This intrinsic value has nothing to do with the weight 
of the body or its reference area. For example, it is 
common to calculate or measure the variation of lift 
coefficient for a given aerodynamic shape as a function 
of the angle of attack (for given Mach and Reynolds 
numbers). When we calculate the value of Ci which 
is necessary for flight of a given vehicle at a given 
weight, speed, and altitude, as in Example 2.2, then we 
hope that such a value of Ci lies within the intrinsic 
values associated with the vehicle shape; that is, we 
hope that the necessary value of CL can be obtained at 
some reasonable angle of attack for the vehicle. This 
is not guaranteed; and if such a required CL cannot be 
obtained, the design characteristics or design perfor­
mance envelope for the flight vehicle must be modi­
fied. This is not a problem at high speeds, where the 
value of CL is low and is readily obtainable. How­
ever, it can be a problem at the low speeds associated 
with takeoff or landing, where the required value of 
Cl is large. As we will see, this can have a major 
impact on airplane design, driving the designer to in­
corporate high-lift devices (flaps, slats, etc.) which 
"artificially" increase Cl beyond the intrinsic values 
(continued) 
61 

===== PDF PAGE 75 =====
62 PART 1 Preliminary Considerations 
efficient CD to be as small as 
germane is the 
for the basic vehicle shape. (Such high-lift devices are 
discussed in Chapter 5.) Also, the required high val­
ues of CL at low speeds will influence the designer's 
choice of wing area for the airplane, because the re­
quired values of CL can be reduced by increasing the 
wing area. However, a greater wing area may adversely 
affect other design characteristics of the 
ratio is a measure of the of a 
vehicle; the 
Also, in airplane design, the value of CL does 
not always stand alone, a consideration by itself. In 
Example 2.2, we calculated that a value of CL = 0.362 rather than a specific value of CL 
2.5 LIFT, DRAG, AND MOMENT COEFFICIENTS: 
HOW THEY VARY 
L/D 
Equations (2.9a)to (2.9c) indicate that CL, CD, and for a body 
shape vary with the angle of attack, Reynolds and Mach number. Question: 
What are these variations? There is no pat answer; first and the answer 
depends on the shape of the body itself. Whole volumes have been written about 
this question. In particular, the two books by Hoerner, one on drag (Ref. and 
the other on lift (Ref. 1 have taken on the aura of Bibles in 
They contain a wealth of information and data on coefficients for a wide 
variety of shapes. It is recommended that you own of these two books. Our 
purpose in this section is to address the question in a limited to illustrate 
some typical variations, in order to give you a "feel" for the matter. 
First, Jet us consider a conventional airfoil with camber (airfoil 
shape arched upward), such as the NACA 2412 airfoil shown at the of 2.6b. 
This is a two-dimensional body, and it is customarJ in the literature 
to write the lift, drag, and moment coefficients for such two-dimensional 
in lowercase letters, namely, c1, cd, and Cm, The variation of these 
coefficients with the angle of attack a and Reynolds number Re is shown in Fig. 2.6 
for the NACA 2412 airfoil. These are actual data obtained NACA in 
the early 1940s in a specially designed wind tunnel for airfoil nrr,nP,rt, 
(see the historical note in Section 2.1 Figure 2.6a is an answer to how the lift 
coefficient c1 and the moment coefficient taken about the 
vary with a and Re. 
First, consider the variation of the lift coefficient with 
in Fig. 2.6a. NoteJhat the curve of c1 versus a 
as sketched in Fig. 2.7. 
with a over most of the nr:1er"'" 
is called the a theoretical 

===== PDF PAGE 76 =====
CHAPTER 2 ® Aerodynamics of the The Drag Polar 
1' 
I J i -I I 
I I ..._J I 
I 
i,,-, ' ,-
I 
111, LJj__L c2L......1-J.......l...... .. L ... J I .. 
0 2 .4 ./J .8 IJ} 
' 'I 
'* _J--H+ I 
~+-· I ' I' 
I• 
I 
:.2 j I 
''' I 
l (+-,1-1-1-H-+-1+++·+'1<-+-!-H!-+-l-+-H 
I, 
,J ,w i 
I 
L " 
i 
' I 
' 
I 
I 
l"" ' 
t,,a 
I 
;i 
I 
-
I 
0 
,•,H -+++-+-+....++H!--1-H-H+-+-+++-+·J...H--+++-t 
-,/ ' 
J 
I 
I 
-UJl+l++++++t-+-i--hi+l++++++++- .. f-H-+-+ 
f-z I ' ~ ii 
~~ t 
11 O ,ll;:,:/(1' 
a 57 .;M.3 -.004 
... 247 -.018 I I 
• 5.7 ~'~r7'fn . I 
I 
I 
... 
-;2 1.2 t/J 
(a) (b) 
2.6 Data for the NACA 2412 airfoil. (a) Lift coefficient and moment coefficient about 
the quarter-chord versus angle of attack. Drag coefficient and moment 
coefficient about the aerodynamic center as a function of the lift coefficient. (From 
Abbott and von Doenhoff, Ref. 19.) 
measured lift are very close to the theoretical values. 
value for the lift slope for the NACA 2412 airfoil is easily measured 
from the data given in Fig. 2.6a; this author measures a value of a0 = 0. I 05 (try it 
yourself). From the generic lift curve shown in Fig. 2.7, note that there is a finite 
value of c1 at zero angle of attack, and that the airfoil must be pitched down to some 
angle of attack for the lift to be zero. This angle of attack is denoted by ot L=O 
for the NACA 2412 airfoil, the data in Fig. 2.6a show that OIL=O = -2.2°. 
cambered airfoils have negative zero-lift angles of attack. In contrast, 
a airfoil has aL=O = O°, and a negatively cambered airfoil as the 
NACA 2412 airfoii turned upside has a positive aL=O· cambered 
airfoils are of little practical interest in 
At the other extreme, at 
reaches a maximum (c1)max in Fig. 2.7, and then drops as ex 
is further increased. The reason for this drop in c1 at high a is that flow separation 
63 

===== PDF PAGE 77 =====
64 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Zero-lift 
angle of 
attack 
Figure 2.7 
Lift slope: :~ = a0 
Angle of attack a 
Sketch of a generic lift curve. 
:.....--=:-­
~.;) Separated 
~ flow 
occurs over the top surface of the airfoil and the lift decreases (sometimes precipi­
tously). In this condition, the airfoil is said to be stalled. In contrast, over the linear 
portion of the lift curve, the flow is attached over most of the airfoil surface. These two 
phenomena-attached and separated flow-are shown schematically for the appropri­
ate portions of the lift curve in Fig. 2. 7. (In the early part of the twentieth century, the 
great German aerodynamicist Ludwig Prandtl labeled attached and separated flows 
as "healthy" and "unhealthy" flows, respectively-an apt description.) 
The variation of CJ with the Reynolds number is also shown in Fig. 2.6a. Note 
that the data are given for three different values of Re ranging from 3.1 x 106 to 
8.9 x 106 (the code key for the different Reynolds numbers is given at the bottom of 
Fig. 2.6b ). The data in Fig. 2.6a show virtually no effect of the Reynolds number on 
the linear portion of the lift curve; that is, a0 = dcif dais essentially insensitive to 
variations in Re. (This is true for the high Reynolds numbers associated with normal 
flight; however, at much lower Reynolds numbers, say, 100,000 encountered by model 
airplanes and many small uninhabited aerial vehicles, there is a substantial Re effect 
that reduces the lift slope below its high Reynolds number value.) On the other hand, 
the data in Fig. 2.6a show an important Reynolds number effect on (CJ)max, with 
higher values of (CJ)max corresponding to higher Reynolds numbers. This should be 
no surprise. The Reynolds number is a similarity parameter in aerodynamics which 
governs the nature of viscous flow. The development of separated flow over the airfoil 
at high a is a viscous flow effect-the viscous boundary layer literally separates from 
the surface. Hence we would expect the value of (c1)max to be sensitive to Re; such a 
sensitivity is clearly seen in Fig. 2.6a. 
The variation of Cmc14 with a and Re is also shown in Fig. 2.6a, The angle-of­
attack variation is sketched generically in Fig. 2.8. Note that the moment coefficient 

===== PDF PAGE 78 =====
c H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Separated flow 
over bottom surface 
( Moment coefficient 
slope: dc'"c14 
~=mo 
Figure 2.8 Sketch of a generic moment curve. 
Separated flow 
over top surface 
~. 
~ 
a 
curve is essentially linear over most of the practical range of the angle of attack; that 
is, the slope of the moment coefficient curve, mo = dcm,14 / da is essentially constant. 
This slope is positive for some airfoils (as shown here), but can be negative for other 
airfoils. The variation becomes nonlinear at high angle of attack, when the flow 
separates from the top surface of the airfoil, and at low, highly negative angles of 
attack, when the flow separates from the bottom surface of the airfoil. As was shown 
in the case of the lift curve, the linear portion of the moment curve is essentially 
independent of Re. 
The variation of CJ with the lift coefficient is shown in Fig. 2.6b. Since the lift 
coefficient is a linear function of the angle of attack, you could just as well imagine 
that the abscissa in Fig. 2.6b could be a instead of c1, and the shape of the drag curve 
would be the same. Hence, the generic variation of CJ with a is as shown in Fig. 2.9. 
For a cambered airfoil, such as the NACA 2412 airfoil, the minimum value (cd )min 
does not necessarily occur at zero angle of attack, but rather at some finite but small 
angle of attack. For the NACA 2412 airfoil considered in Fig. 2.6, the value of (CJ )min 
for a Reynolds number of 8.9 x 106 is 0.006, and it occurs at an angle of attack of 
-0.5° (i.e., the minimum value of CJ from Fig. 2.6b occurs at c1 = 0.2, which from 
Fig. 2.6a occurs at an angle of attack of -0.5°). The drag curve in Figs. 2.6b and 2.9 
shows a very flat minimum-the drag coefficient is at or near its minimum value for 
a range of angle of attack varying from -2° to +2°. For this angle-of-attack range, 
the drag is due to friction drag and pressure drag. In contrast, the rapid increase in c" 
which occurs at higher values of a is due to the increasing region of separated flow 
over the airfoil, which creates a large pressure drag. 
The variation of c11 with Reynolds number is also shown in Fig. 2,6b. Basic 
viscous flow theory and experiments show that the local skin-friction coefficient c r 
on a surface, say, for a flat plate, varies as c r ex 1 / JRe for laminar flow, and 
approximately er .ex 1 / (Re )0·2 for turbulent flo~ (see, e.g., Refs. 3 and 16 ). Hence, it 
is no surprise that (c" )min in Fig, 2.6b is sensitive to Reynolds number and is larger at 
65 

===== PDF PAGE 79 =====
66 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
the lower Reynolds numbers. Moreover, the Reynolds number influences the extent 
and characteristics of the separated flow region, and hence it is no surprise that cd at 
the larger values of a is also sensitive to the Reynolds number. 
Also shown in Fig. 2.6b is the variation of the moment coefficient about the 
aerodynamic cent~r. By definition, the aerodynamic center is that point on the airfoil 
about which the moment is independent of the angle of attack. We discuss the concept 
of the aerodynamic center in greater detail in Section 2.6. However, note that, true 
to its definition, the experimentally measured value of cm,.c in Fig. 2.6b is essentially 
constant over the range-of-lift coefficient (hence constant over the range of angle of 
attack). 
Returning to Eqs. (2.9a) to (2.9c), we note that the aerodynamic coefficients are a 
function of Mach number also. The data in Fig. 2.6 do not give us any information on 
the Mach number effect; indeed, these data were measured in a low-speed subsonic 
wind tunnel (the NACA Langley two-dimensional low-turbulence pressure tunnel) 
which had maximum velocities ranging from 300 mi/h when operated at one atmo­
sphere (atm) and 160 mi/h when operated at IO atm. Hence, the data in Fig. 2.6 are 
essentially incompressible flow data. Question: How do the aerodynamic coefficients 
vary when the free-stream Mach number M00 is increased to higher subsonic speeds 
and then into the supersonic regime? For a conventional airfoil, the generic variations 
of c1 and cd with M00 are sketched in Figs. 2.10 and 2.11, respectively. Consider first 
the variation of CJ as shown in Fig. 2.10. At subsonic speeds, the "compressibility 
effects" associated with increasing M00 result in a progressive increase in CJ. The 
reason for this can be seen by recalling that the lift is mainly due to the pressure 
distribution on the surface. As M00 increases, the differences in pressure from one 
point to another on the surface become more pronounced. Hence, CJ increases as 
M00 increases. The Prandtl-Glauert rule, the first and simplest (and also the least 
accurate) of the several formulas for subsonic "compressibility corrections," predicts 
that CJ will rise inversely proportional to JI - M&, (see Refs. 3 and 16). Assuming 
an incompressible value of c1 = 2Jra (the theoretical result for a flat plate in inviscid 
flow), the dashed line in the subsonic region of Fig. 2.10 shows the theoretical Prandtl­
Glauert variation. In the supersonic region of Fig. 2.10, the dashed curve shows the 
theoretical supersonic variation for a thin airfoil, where CJ = 4a/ J M&, - 1 (see 
Ref. 16). The solid curve illustrates a generic variation of c1 versus M00 for both the 
Figure 2.9 Sketch of o generic drag curve. 

===== PDF PAGE 80 =====
I. 
0 
Figure 2.10 
CHAPTER 2 
Subsonic 
0.2 0.4 
Aerodynamics of the Airpiane: The Drag Polar 
21Ta I ~, I 
'i l - M2 '-! = I 
/ 
--/ 
0.6 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
I 
I 
.I. 
0.8 
I 
I 
Transonic 
l.O 
J 
l.2 
Free-stream mach number M= 
Supersonic 
1.4 l.6 
Sketch of a generic lift coefficient variation with Mach number. 
l.8 
S~hock E~::;~on 
Shock 
\ 
coc~/ 
t1 '\/M~~ 1 
1.0 
Figure 2.11 Sketch of a generic drag coefficient variation with Mach number. 
subsonic and supersonic regions. The oscillatory variation of c1 near Mach I is typical 
of the transonic regime, and is due to the shock wave-boundary layer interaction that 
is prominant for transonic Mach numbers. Actual measurements made by NACA 
67 
2.0 

===== PDF PAGE 81 =====
P A R T 1 e Preliminary Considerations 
for the subsonic behavior of ez versus Mach number for the NACA 2315 airfoil are 
shown in Fig. 2.12. 
The generic variation of cd with M 00 is sketched in Fig. 2.11. Here, in contrast to 
c1 which increases with Meo, cd stays relatively constant with Meo up to, and slightly 
beyond, the critical Mach number-that free-stream Mach number at which sonic flow 
is first encountered at some location on the airfoil. The drag in the subsonic region 
is mainly due to friction, and the "compressibility effect" on friction in the subsonic 
regime is small. (In reality, the skin-friction drag coefficient decreases slightly as 
Meo increases, but we are ignoring this small effect.) The flow over the airfoil in 
this regime is smooth and attached, with no shock waves present, as sketched at the 
left in Fig. 2.11. As M00 increases above Merit, a large pocket of locally supersonic 
flow forms above, and sometimes also below, the airfoil. These pockets. of supersonic 
flow are terminated at the downstream end by shock waves. The presence of these 
shocks, by themselves, will affect the pressure distribution in such a fashion as to 
cause an increase in pressure drag (this drag increase is related to the loss of total 
pressure across the shock waves). However, the dominant effect is that the shock 
wave interacts with the boundary layer on the surface, causing the boundary layer to 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
"-1= 
·~ 0.3 
!E C) 
0 
(.) 
0.2 ,::: 
:.:l 
0.1 
0 
-0.1 
-0.2'-._..._..,_....._....__... ..... _._."-.__._ ......................... _.._ ..... _.__......, 
0 
Figure 2.12 
O. l 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 
Mach number M= 
Variation of lift coefficient versus Mach number with angle of 
attack as a parameter for an NACA 2315 airfoil. (Wind 
tunnel measurements were taken at NACA Langley Memorial 
laboratory.) 

===== PDF PAGE 82 =====
CHAPTER 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
separate from the surface, and hence greatly increasing the pressure drag. This type 
of flow field is illustrated in the middle of Fig. 2. I I; it is characteristic of transonic 
flows. As a result, the drag skyrockets in the transonic regime, as sketched in Fig. 
2.11. This rapid divergence of drag occurs at a value of M 00 slightly larger than Merit; 
the free-stream Mach number at which this divergence occurs is called the drag­
divergence Mach number Mctrag div· Finally, in the supersonic regime, CJ gradually 
decreases, foiiowing approximately the variation CJ ex I/ J M~ - I (see Ref. 16). 
Actual measurements made by NACA for the subsonic and transonic behavior of CJ 
versus Mach number for the NACA 23 ! 5 airfoil are shown in Fig. 2.13. Note the 
drastic increase in CJ as Mach l is approached. 
0.18 ..._ 
0.!7 
-
0.16 
I 
- I 
0.15 
-
0.14 
-
0.13 
,... 
0.12 
-v°"' 
= 
O.l l 
<) 
-·;:; 0.10 ,.;::: 
4-< 
<) 
0 u 
0.09 ell 
,._ 
J 
" .... 
Cl 
0.08 
0.07 
0.06 
0.05 
0.04 
0.03; 
0.02: 
,-
I 
I-
/l 
I- /, 
- Ill °'o, 
- deg 
/1 // - 5 
l/; VI), °'o• 4 deg ---- 3 v../ ~ 0 
2 1 --
'f 
I i I -1 I I I I I I 
o.oi 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 l.O 
Figure 2.13 
Mach number M= 
Variation of drag coefficient versus Mach number 
with angle of attack as a parameter for an NACA 
2315 airfoil. (Wind tunnel measurements were 
made at NACA Langley Memorial Laboratory.) 
69 

===== PDF PAGE 83 =====
70 
Example 2.3 
PART e Preliminary Considerations 
Since the moment on the airfoil is due mainiy to the surface pressure 
the variation of Cm with Mach number will qualitatively resemble the variation of c1 
shown in Fig. 2.1 O; hence no more details will be given here. 
Although a two-dimensional airfoil has been used in this section to illustrate 
the variation of the aerodynamic coefficients with a, and Mao, these results are 
qualitatively representative of the variations of CL, and for three-dimensional 
aerodynamic bodies. We will discuss the aerodynamics of three-dimensional 
in subsequent sections. Also, the book by Abbott and Von Doenhoff is the 
definitive source of NACA airfoil data; it is recommended that you own a copy. 
for the NACA 2412 airfoil in Fig. 2.6, calculate the iifHo-drag ratios at a = OC, 6', and 12'. 
Assume Re = 8.9 x !06 . 
Solution 
From Fig. 2.6a, at a = O°, c1 = 0.25. From Fig. 2.6b, at c, = 0.25, we have cd = 0.006. 
Hence, 
c, 0.25 ~ 
-;:;; = 0.006 = L:!_2J 
For a = 6°, c1 = 0.85 and cd = 0.0076. Hence, 
Cz 0.85 ~ - = --- = 111.8 
Cd 0.0076 
For a= 12°, c1 = 1.22 and cd = 0.0112. Hence, 
c, 1.22 ii-:::1 
-;:;; = O.Qli2 =~ 
at a= 0° 
a= 6° 
a= 12° 
Note: (]) The values of L/ D first increase with an increase in a, reach a maximum value at 
some angle of attack (in this case, somewhere between 6° and !2°), and then decrease as a is 
further increased. 
(2) The values of L/ D for airfoils can exceed JOO, as shown here. This is a large L/D 
ratio. However, for finite wings and complete airplane configurations, the maximum values of 
L / D are much smaller, typically in the range of l O to 20, for reasons to be discussed later. 
2.6 THE AERODYNAMIC CENTER 
We have already defined the aerodynamic center as that point on a body about which 
the moments are independent of the angle of attack; that is. 
practical range of angle of attack. At first thought, such a seems 
strange. How can such a point exist, and how can it be found? We address these 
questions in this section. 
Consider the front of an airfoil sketched in Fig. 2.14. We choose the 
lift and moment system on the airfoil to be specified by L and at the 
quarter-chord location, as shown in Fig. 2. J 4. (Recall from Section 2.3 and Fig. 2.5 
that the resultant aerodynamic force can be visualized as acting through any 

===== PDF PAGE 84 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Figure 2.14 
L 
c/4 Xa.c. 
Schematic for finding the location of the 
aerodynamic center. 
on the airfoil, as long as the corresponding moment about that point is also given.) 
The choice of the quarter-chord point for the application of lift in Fig. 2.14 is purely 
arbitrary-we could just as well choose any other point. 
Does the aerodynamic center, as defined above, exist? For the time being, we 
assume its existence and denote its location on the airfoil by the fixed point labeled 
a.c. in Fig. 2.14. This point is located a distance Xa.c. from the quarter-chord. Taking 
moments about the point a.c., we have 
Ma.c. = LXa.c. + M,'/4 
Dividing Eq. (2.10) by q00 Sc, we have 
or 
Ma.c. = _£_ ( Xa.c.) + Mc/4 
q00 Sc q00 S C q00 Sc 
(Xa.c.) Cm,.,.= Ct -C- + Cm,·/4 
Differentiating Eq. (2.11) with respect to angle of attack a gives 
dcm,.,. = dc1 (Xa.c.) + dcm,14 
da da c da 
[2.10] 
(2.11] 
[2.12] 
Note that in Eq. (2.12) we are treating Xa.c. as a fixed point on the airfoil, defined 
as that point about which moments are independent of the angle of attack. If such 
a fixed point does exist, it should be consistent with Eq. (2.12) where the derivative 
dcm,.clda is set equal to zero (since Cm,., is constant with a, by definition of the 
aerodynamic center). In this case, Eq. (2.12) becomes 
dc1 (Xa.c.) dcm,'/4 0=- -- +--da c da [2.13] 
71 

===== PDF PAGE 85 =====
Example 2.4 
PART 1 Preliminary Considerations 
In Section 2.5, we saw how dc1 / dot and dcm,14 / dot are constant over the linear portions 
of the lift and moment curves; we denoted these constants by a0 and m0 , 
Solving Eq. (2.13) for Xa.c/c yields 
4] 
Hence, Eq. (2. proves that, with linear lift and moment curves, where 
mo and a0 are fixed values, the center does exist as on the 
airfoil. Moreover, Eq. allows the calculation of this 
for the NACA 2412 airfoil, calculate the location of the aerodynamic center. 
Solution 
From the airfoil data shown in Fig. 2.6a, we can find a0 and m0 as follows. First, examining 
the lift coefficient curve in Fig. 2.6a, we can read off the following data: 
At a = -8° c1 = -0.6 at fX = 8° CJ = 1.08 
·Hence, 
dc1 1.08 - (-0.6) ao = - = ----- = 0.105 da go - (-80) 
Examining the moment coefficient curve in Fig. 2.6a, we can read off the following data: 
At OI = -8° Cm, 14 = -0.045 at Cl = 10° Cm,; 4 = -0.035 
Hence, 
dcmc/4 -0.035 - ( -0.045) m - - ------- = 5.56 X 0 - -da- - 10° - (-8°) 
Thus, from Eq. (2.14), 
Xa.c. 5.56 X 10-4 I I - = - = -0.0053 
C 0.105 
Reflecting on Fig. 2.14, we see that the aerodynamic center is located 0.53% of the chord 
length ahead of the quarter-chord This is very close to the quarter-chord point itself. 
Moreover, this result agrees exactly with the measured value on page 183 of Abbott 
and Von Doenhoff (Ref. 19). 
The result of Example 2.4 is not uncommon. For most standard airfoil shapes, the aero­
dynamic center is quite close to the quarter-chord Indeed, the results of thin airfoil 
theory (see, e.g., l 6) that, for a cambere(;! airfoil, the quarter-chord is the 
aerodynamic center. 

===== PDF PAGE 86 =====
C H A P T E R 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Poiar 
2.7 NACA AIRFOIL NOMENCLATURE 
Today, when new airplanes are designed, the shape of the airfoil section for the wings 
is usually custom-made. Most aircraft manufacturers have a stable of aerodynamic 
computer programs which allow them to customize the airfoil shape to specific design 
needs. In contrast, before the age of computers and computational aerodynamics, the 
aircraft industry relied primarily on series of airfoils empiricaily designed and tested 
by government agencies, such as the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) in Britain 
and the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in the United States. 
The work by these agencies in the period between 1920 and 1960 resulted in many 
families of "standard airfoils" from which the designer could choose. Many of these 
standard airfoils are used on airplanes still flying today, and the airfoils continue 
to provide a convenient selection for the designer who does not have the time or 
availability of the modern computer programs for custom-designing airfoil shapes. 
In particular, the many NACA families of airfoils have seen worldwide use. Because 
of the continued importance of the NACA standard airfoil designs, and the wide 
extent to which they have been used, it is worthwhile to discuss the appropriate 
NACA nomenclatere for these airfoils. This is the purpose of this section. 
Prior to 1930, an airfoil design was customized and personalized, with very little 
consistent rationale. There was no systematic approach or uniformity among the 
various designers and organizations in Europe or in the United States. This situation 
changed dramatically in the 1930s when NACA adopted a rational approach to the 
design of airfoils and carried out exhaustive and systematic wind tunnel measurements 
of the airfoil properties. The history of airfoil development is discussed in chapter 5 
of Ref. 3; some additional historical comments are made in Section 2.11 of this book. 
The NACA contributions started with the simple definition of airfoil geometric 
properties. These are sketched in Fig. 2.15. The major design feature of an airfoil is 
the mean camber line, which is the locus of points halfway between the upper and 
lower surfaces, as measured perpendicular to the mean camber line itself. The most 
Leading 
edge 
Figure 2. 15 
Mean 
camber 
line 
-------'---
Thickness 
__ J ---------
Camber 
------- Chord c ---------------
Airfoil nomenclature. 
73 

===== PDF PAGE 87 =====
74 PART • Preliminary Considerations 
forward and rearward points of the mean cambef line are the leading and trailing 
edges, respectively. The straight line connecting the leading and trailing edges is the 
chord line of the airfoil, and the precise distance from the leading to the trailing edge 
measured along the chord line is simply designated the chord of the airfoil, denoted by 
c. The camber is the maximum distance between the mean camber line and the chord 
line, measured perpendicular to the chord line. The camber, the shape of the mean 
camber line, and, to a lesser extent, the thickness distribution of the airfoil essentially 
control the lift and moment characteristics of the airfoil. The mean camber line is 
sketched in Fig. 2.16a. Then a thickness distribution is designed, which by itself 
leads to a symmetric shape, as sketched in Fig. 2.16b. The shape of the airfoil itself 
is essentially built up by designating first the shape of the mean camber line, which 
can be given as an analytic equation or simply as a tabulated set of coordinates. Then 
the ordinates of the top and bottom airfoil surfaces are obtained by superimposing the 
thickness distribution on the mean camber line, as shown in Fig. 2.16c; that is, the 
thickness distribution is laid perpendicular to the mean camber line. In this fashion, 
the final airfoil shape is obtained. 
The first family of standard NACA airfoils was derived in the early 1930s. This 
was the four-digit series, of which the NACA 2412 airfoil shown in Fig. 2.6 was a 
member. The numbers in the designation mean the following: The first digit gives 
the maximum camber in percentage of chord. The second digit is the location of 
the maximum camber in tenths of chord, measured from the leading edge. The last 
two digits give the maximum thickness in percentage of chord. For example, the 
NACA 2412 airfoil has a maximum camber of 2% of the chord (or 0.02c), located 
at 0.4c from the leading edge. The maximum thickness is 12% of the chord (or 
0.12c ). In the four-digit series, a symmetric airfoil is designated by zeros in the 
first two digits; for example, the NACA 0012 airfoil is a symmetric airfoil with 12% 
thickness. The shapes of the NACA 2412 and 0012 airfoils are shown in Fig. 2.17a 
and b, respectively. 
In the middle 1930s, the second family ofNACA airfoils was developed, the five­
digit series. This series was designed with the location of maximum camber closer 
to the leading edge than was the case for the four-digit series; it had been determined 
that the maximum lift coefficient increased as the maximum camber location was 
shifted forward. A typical NACA five-digit airfoil is the NACA 23012, shown in 
Fig. 2.17c. The numbers mean the following: The first digit, when multiplied by 
3/2, gives the design lift coefficient in tenths (the design lift coefficient is defined and 
discussed in a subsequent paragraph). The design lift coefficient is an index of the 
EF I I EJ:::r> 
(a) Mean camber line ( c) Combination of the thickness 
distribution wrapped around the mean 
camber line-final airfoil shape 
Figure 2.16 
(b) Thickness distribution 
(symmetric shape) 
Buildup of an airfoil profile. 

===== PDF PAGE 88 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
0.2 
/ - - --....._ 
llllllllllllllll~IIIII 
y/c 0 
-0.2 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
xlc x/c 
(a) NACA 2412 (b) NACA 0012 
0.2 
..--- ---...__ 
\ 
\ I 
,': ,<: WI 11111 ff I 
ylc 0 
-0.2 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 
xlc xlc 
(c) NACA 23012 (d) NACA 64-·212 
Figure 2.17 Various standard NACA airfoil shapes, all with 12% thickness. 
amount of camber; the higher the camber, the higher the design lift coefficient. The 
second and third digits together are a number which, when multiplied by one-half, 
gives the location of maximum camber relative to the leading edge in percentage of 
chord. The last two digits give the maximum thickness in percentage of chord. For 
example, the NACA 23012 airfoil has a design lift coefficient of 0.3, the location 
of maximum camber at 15% of the chord (or 0.15c) from the leading edge, and a 
maximum thickness of 12% of the chord (or 0.12c). 
During the late 1930s and early 1940s, NACA developed a series of airfoils 
designed to encourage laminar flow with the hope of reducing the skin-friction drag. 
The most successful of these laminar-flow airfoils was the 6-series sections. A typical 
NACA 6-series airfoil is the NACA 64-212 airfoil, shown in Fig. 2.17d. The numbers 
mean the following: The first digit is simply the series designation. The second digit 
is the location of the minimum pressure, in tenths of chord behind the leading edge, 
for the basic symmetric section at zero lift. (Recall that it is this symmetric thickness 
section which is wrapped around the mean camber line to generate the final airfoil 
shape. In the NACA numbering system for the 6-series airfoils, the second digit gives 
the location of the minimum pressure point on a symmetric airfoil with this thickness 
distribution and at zero angle of attack, rather than the minimum pressure point for the 
actual 6-series airfoil itself.) The third digit gives the design lift coefficient in tenths. 
The last two digits, as usual, give the maximum thickness in percentage of chord. For 
example, the NACA 64-212 airfoil is a member of the 6-series airfoils with a minimum 
75 
1.0 

===== PDF PAGE 89 =====
76 P A R T l @ Preliminary Considerations 
pressure point (for the symmet.ic thickness distribution at-zero angle of attack) at 0.4c 
from the leading edge. Its design lift coefficient is 0.2, a.11.d the maximum thickness 
is 12% of the chord (or 0.12c). 
The variation of cd with c1 (or a) for the la..rninar-flow airfoils deserves some 
attention. The drag coefficient for the NACA 64-212 airfoil is shown in Fig. 2.18. 
Compare this with the drag curve shown in Fig. 2.6b for the NACA 2412. Note that, 
by comparison, the cd curve for the NACA 64-212 airfoil has a dip located in the range 
of low angle of attack, resulting in a considerably lower minimum drag coefficient 
(0.004 for the NACA 64-212 compared to 0.006 for the NACA 2412). This dip in the 
drag curve is frequently called the drag bucket; all the 6-series airfoils exhibit a drag 
bucket. Clearly, in the NACA wind tunnel tests, the laminar-flow feature operated 
as planned and resulted in a 33% reduction in minimum drag coefficient. Because 
of this stunning improvement, many high-performance aircraft have utilized NACA 
6-series airfoils. The first aircraft to use an NACA laminar-flow airfoil was the North 
American P-51 Mustang of World War II fame, shown in Fig. 1.25. [There is some 
controversy, due to lack of documentation, as to specifically which NACA laminar­
flow section was used on the P-51. A later version, the P-5 lH, used a 6-series airfoil, 
but earlier versions apparently used an earlier, 4-series NACA laminar-flow airfoil. 
See the interesting paper by Lednicer and Gilchrist (Ref. 20) for more information; 
this paper describes a modem computational aerodynamic analysis of the P-51, and 
of course the authors needed the correct geometry of the airplane.] However, as 
described in Section 1.2.3, the laminar-flow airfoil, when manufactured in the factory 
and used in the field, was contaminated with surface roughness (in comparision to the 
NACA's jewellike wind tunnel models), and the expected benefit from laminar 
flow 
was not totally realized in practice. However, almost as a fluke, the NACA 6-series 
airfoils had relatively large critical Mach numbers compared to the earlier NACA 
airfoil families, and it is for this reason that the 6-series airfoils were used on many 
high-speed jet aircraft after World War II. 
The numbering system for the NACA five-digit and 6-series airfoils involves in 
part the notion of the design lift coefficient. When applied in this context, the design 
lift coefficient for an airfoil is defined as follows: Imagine the airfoil replaced solely 
by its mean camber line, as sketched in Fig. 2.19. (This is the model used in the classic 
thin airfoil theory, such as described in Ref. 16.) There is only one angle of attack at 
which the local flow direction at the leading edge will be tangent to the camber line at 
that point; such a case is sketched in Fig. 2.19a. The theoretical lift coefficient for the 
camber line at this angle of attack is, by definition, the ideal or design lift coefficient 
This definition was coined by Theodore Theodorsen, a well-known NACA theoretical 
aerodynamicist, in 1931. For any other angle of attack, the inviscid potential flow 
will have to curl around the leading edge, such as shown in Fig. 2. i 9b. Potential 
flow theory shows that when the flow passes over a sharp, convex comer, the velocity 
becomes infinite. There is only one angle of attack at which an infinite velocity is 
avoided at the leading edge, namely, that corresponding to the case shown in Fig. 
2.19a. The lift coefficient for this case is, by definition, the design lift coefficient 
which is referenced in the NACA airfoil nomenclature. 

===== PDF PAGE 90 =====
C H A P T E R 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
I I ! 
..-r- --
i 
-- \_ H 
I I \~ 
.2 .4 .s 
,::.D20'!'-,i--4-l-,..+-+-11--4-f--ll--l--1-t-+-++-+--l-+-+--t-t-i-+-+-+--H-!-i-+-++-! 
l 
~-0161-1~-i-4-~l-+-l---l--\+-1-4-+-+-4-l-l-+-+-+-+-i-+-+-if-+-t-+ 
'l, 
8 
8' ,lj .012HH++-
.i .... 
l.i 
Ji OOSr-1--r-;-t--r-
~!1-1-1--+-l--+-l-l--l-4-+-1-t-+-+-+-~l-+-+-+-+-1-t-+-+--t-t-1,-+-+-t-! 
~ 
,l' 
]' -.21-1--+-4-+-1---4-++-+-<l-l--+-+-+--,i-+-+-+-+-t-+-t-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-s 
1., ;-.;;.--+-+-1-+-1-1--+---+-+-+-1-+a.c. pos,fian-1-1-1-1--+-+-+-<f.-l--+--+--+-i!---! 
~ .1£/c t y/c ~ .262 -.Ol:J+-i--+-+-.-+-+-+-l--t--t-t-1--1 
.I., _ ~ 1-l-+-+-+-sl-+-I .262 -.024 -l.-1-1-!--i-+-,!.....!1-4..-+--l--+-l--i _ ..., .262 -.f)e4 
i .,_,._,,_,.5fondord roughness· 
8 simu fed split flop deflected 60"+---i-+-l--t-1-1 
~ ·.41--1---+-+-+-+-+-+ 
~s.....,__.__.._..._...._.........__.__,__.__,._,_,__,._..,_......J ....... _...~ ............... _,_....._.,_~~~~ 
·L/5 -1:2 -.8 -.4 O .4 .8 I.Z us 
Section lift coefficient, c, 
Figure 2.18 Section drag coefficient for an NACA 64-212 laminar-flow airfoil. 

===== PDF PAGE 91 =====
78 P A R T l III Preliminary Considerations 
(a) Condition for the design lift coefficient 
(b) Off-design condition 
Figure 2.19 Sketch illustrating the definition of the iheoretical design lift coefficient. 
2.8 LIFT AND DRAG BUILDUP 
The next time you see an airplane flying overhead, give a thought to the following 
concept. That airplane is more than just a flying machine, more than just an object, 
aesthetic as it may be. It is also a carefully designed synthesis of various aero­
dynamic components-the wings, fuselage, horizontal and vertical tail, and other 
appendages-which are working harmoniously with one another to produce the lift 
necessary to sustain the airplane in the air while at the same time generating the 
smallest possible amount of drag, in a fashion so as to allow the airplane to carry 
out its mission, whatever that may be. The lift and drag exerted on the airplane are 
due to the pressure and shear stress distributions integrated over the total surface area 
of the aircraft-which certainly goes well beyond the concept of the lift and drag 
exerted on just the airfoil sections, as described in the previous sections. Therefore, 
in this section we expand our horizons, and we examine the lift and drag of various 
components of the airplane, both separately and collectively. 
2.8. 1 Lift for a Finite Wing 
The airfoil properties discussed in Section 2.5 can be considered the properties of a 
wing with an infinite span; indeed, airfoil data are sometimes labeled as infinite-wing 
data. However, all real wings are finite in span (obviously). The planview (top view) 
of a finite wing is sketched in Fig. 2.20, where bis the wingspan and Sis the planview 
area. An important geometric property of a finite wing is the aspect ratio AR, defined 
as AR= b2/S. 
Question: Is the lift coefficient of the finite wing the same as that of the airfoil 
sections distributed along the span of the wing? For example, from Fig. 2.6a, the 
lift coefficient for the NACA 2412 airfoil at 4° angle of attack is 0.65. Consider a 

===== PDF PAGE 92 =====
C H A P T E R 2 e Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Planforrn area S 
b2 c, Aspect ratio AR = S ; Taper ratio = c; 
figure 2.20 Finite-wing geometry. 
C·=--===~~)Vo.rte.x _ Low pressure 
High pressure 
(a) Front view of wing 
(b) 
Figure 2.21 Wing-tip vortices. 
I 
1' 
finite wing made up of the NACA 2412 airfoil section, also at an angle of attack of 
4 °. Is the value of CL for the wing also 0.65? The answer is no. The reason for 
the difference is that there are strong vortices produced at the wing tips of the finite 
wing, which trail downstream. These vortices are analogous to minitomadoes, and 
like a tornado, they reach out in the flow field and induce changes in the velocity and 
pressure fields around the wing. These wing-tip vortices are shown schematically 
in Fig. 2.21. Imagine that you are standing on top of the wing shown in Fig. 2.21. 
'19 

===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
80 P A R T 1 ® PreliminarJ Considerations 
You will feel a downward component of velocity over the span of the induced 
by the vortices trailing downstream from both tips. This downward component of 
velocity is called downwash. Now imagine that you are a local airfoil section of the 
finite wing, as sketched in Fig. 2.22a. The local downwash at your location, denoted 
by w, will combine with the free-stream relative wind, denoted V 00 , to produce a 
local relative wind, shown in Fig. 2.22b. This local relative wind is inclined below 
the free-stream direction through the induced angle of attack a;. Hence, as shown 
in Fig. 2.22a, you are effectively feeling an angle of attack different from the actual 
geometric angle of attack a g of the wing relative to the free stream; you are sensing a 
smaller angle of attack O!eff. So if the wing is at a geometric angle of attack of 5°, you 
are feeling an effective angle of attack which is smaller. Hence, the lift coefficient 
for the wing CL is going to be smaller than the lift coefficient for the airfoil c1. This 
explains the answer given to the question posed earlier. 
We have just argued that CL for the finite wing is smaller than c1 for the airfoil 
section used for the wing. The question now is: How much smaller? The answer 
depends on the geometric shape of the wing planform. For most airplanes in use 
today, the wing planform falls in one of four general categories: high-aspect-ratio 
straight wing, (2) low-aspect-ratio straight wing, (3) swept wing, and delta wing. 
Let us consider each of these planforms in turn. 
High-Aspect-Ratio Straight Wing The high-aspect-ratio straight wing is the choice for 
relatively low-speed subsonic airplanes, and historically it has been the type of wing 
planform receiving the greatest study. The classic theory for such wings was worked 
out by Prandtl during World War I, and it still carries through to today as the most 
straightforward engineering approach to estimating the aerodynamic coefficients for 
such finite wings. Called Prandtl's lifting line theory (see, e.g., Ref. 16), this method 
allows, among other properties, the 
estimate of the lift slope a = d CL/ da for a finite 
Free-stream 
relative wind 
Figure 2.22 
(a) 
~Downwashw Localr~ 
(!J) 
illuslralion of induced and effective angles of attack, and downwash w. 

===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
C H A P T E R 2 e Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
wing in terms of the lift slope of the airfoil section a0 = dcif de; as 
ao a = -----~ l + ao/(rre 1AR) 
High-aspect-ratio straight wing 
(incompressible) [2.15] 
where a and ao are the lift slope per radian and e1 is a factor that depends on the 
geometric shape of the wing, including the aspect ratio and taper ratio. (The taper 
ratio is defined in Fig. 2.20. It is the ratio of the tip chord c1 to the root chord c, .) 
Values of e1 are typically on the order of 0.95. 
The results from Eq. (2.15) show that the lift slope for a finite wing decreases 
as the aspect ratio decreases. This is a general result-as the aspect ratio decreases, 
the induced flow effects over the wing due to the tip vortices are stronger, and hence 
at a given angle of attack, the lift coefficient is decreased. This is clearly seen in 
Fig. 2.23. Here, experimentally measured lift curves are shown for seven different 
finite wings with the same airfoil cross section but with different aspect ratios. Note 
that the angle of attack for zero lift, denoted aL=O is the same for all seven wings; 
at zero lift the induced effects theoretically disappear. At any given angle of attack 
larger than otL=O, say, a 1 in Fig. 2.23, the value of CL becomes smaller as the aspect 
ratio is decreased. 
l.2 
0.8 
0.4 
0.0 
-0.4 .___.,___-'---'--~- ......... ~-~--'--......, 
-12 -8 -4 0 4 
a,deg 
12 
Figure 2.23 Effect of aspect ratio on the lift curve. 
16 20 
81 

===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
82 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Prandtl's lifting line theory, hence Eq. (2.15), does not apply to low-aspect-ratio 
wings. Equation (2.15) holds f9r aspect ratios of about 4 or larger. Also, the lifting 
line theory does not predict the influence of AR on C Lm,., which is governed by 
viscous effects. As sketched in Fig. 2.23, experiments show that as AR is reduced, 
C Lm,. is also reduced, and that maximum lift occurs at higher angles of attack. 
Equation (2.15) for the lift slope of the finite wing applies to incompressible 
flow, which limits its 11se to low-speed aircraft. However, during World War II, 
the flight velocities of many straight-wing subsonic airplanes penetrated well into 
the compressible flow regime (flow Mach numbt!rs of 0.3 and higher). Today most 
straight7wing turboprop-powered civil transports and business airplanes fly routinely 
in the subsonic compressible flow regime. For this flight regime, Eq. (2.15) must 
be modified by an appropriate compressibility correction. Historically, the first and 
simplest compressibility correction was·derived independently by Ludwig Prandtl in 
Germany and by Hermann Glauert in England in the 1920s for the case of subsonic 
compressible flow over airfoils. Called the Prandtl-Glauert rule, it allowed the 
· ·. incompressible Ii.ft. slope for an airfoil to be modified for compressibility effects; 
we have already· discussed this modification in conjunction with the trends .shown 
in Figs, 2.10 and 2,12. For a high-aspect-ratio straight wing, we will also use the 
Prandtl-Glauert rule for a compressibility correction. 
This is carried out as follows. Consider· a thin airfoil at small to moderate angle 
of attack. Denote the low-speed, incompressible lift slope for this airfoil by ao, as in 
Eq. (2.15). Denote the high-speed compressible value of the lift slope for the same 
airfoil at a free-stream Mach number M00 by ao,comp· The Prandtl-Glauert rule is 
ao ao - -,====:=: .~omp - JI - M&:, 
Let us assume that Eq. (2.15), which is obtained from Prandtl's lifting line theory, 
also holds for subsonic compressible flow, that is, 
ao,comp acomp = . 1 + ao,c?mp/(1re1AR) 
[2.15a] 
where acomp is the compressible lift slope for the finite wing. Replacing ao,comp in Eq. 
(2.15a) with the Prandtl-Glauert rule, we have,. 
or 
ao/JI - M&:, acomp = ----'---'-:;:::::::===-
1 + ao/(1re1AR/I - M&:,) 
ao acomp = --;:===------
JI - M&:, + ao/(1re1AR) 
Subsonic hi'gh-aspect-ratio 
straight wing 
(compressible) 
[2.16] 
where M00 is the free-stream Mach number. Equation (2.16) gives a quick, but 
approximate correction to the lift slope; because it is derived from linear subsonic 
flow theory (see, e.g., Ref. 16), it is not recommended for use for M00 greater than 
0. 7. Figure 2.24 is an illustration of the variation of lift slope with free-stream Mach 

===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
lO 
'2 8 
"' :a 
re: 
'"' s i 6 
[ a 
0 
t:lu 
g. 4 
-;;; 
¢:; 
~ ~ 
2 ~ 
C H A P T E R 2 ® Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Dr~g Polar 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Eq. (2.16) I 
~I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
11 
11 
11 
11 
1 I 
! \ 
\ Eq. (2.17) 
\/ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
I 
High-aspect-ratio 
Straight wing: 
-~----- Thin airfoil (5% thickness or less) 
\...-'"---- Thick airfoil 
'--------''-----~----~---------'----------'------' 
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Free-stream Mach number M00 
Figure 2.24 Effect of Mach number on the lilt slope. 
number for a high-aspect-ratio straight wing. Results obtained From Eq. (2.16) are 
shown as the dashed curve at the left in Fig. 2.24. The solid curve in Fig. 2.24 is 
representative of actual experimental data for a high-aspect-ratio straight wing. Note 
that Fig. 2.24 (for a finite wing) is similar to Fig. 2.10 (for an airfoil). 
For Mach numbers closer to 1-the transonic regime-there are compressibility 
corrections for pressure coefficient that attempt to take into account the, nonlinear 
nature of transonic flow (see, e.g., Ref. 16), and which, when integrated over the 
wing surface, lead to predictions of the lift slope that are more accurate at higher 
subsonic values of M00 than Eq. (2.16). However, today the preferred method of 
calculating the transonic lift coefficient is to use computational fluid dynamics (see, 
e.g., Ref. 21) to numerically solve the appropriate nonlinear Euler or Navier-Stokes 
equations for the transonic flow field over the wing, and then to integrate the calculated 
surface pressure distribution to obtain the lift. 
For supersonic flow over a high-aspect-ratio straight wing, the lift slope can be 
approximated from supersonic linear theory (see Ref. 16) as 
i 4 
l:comp = JM'/x, _ l 
Supersonic high-aspect-ratio 
straight wing [2.17] 
3.0 
!13 

===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
Example 2.5 
Example 2.6 
P A R T l ® Preliminary Considerations 
where acomp is per radian. The variation of lift slope predicted by Eq. (2.17) is shown 
as the dashed curve at the right in Fig. 2.24. 
Consider a straight wing of aspect ratio 6 with an NACA 2412 airfoil. Assuming low-speed 
flow, calculate the lift coefficient at an angle of attack of 6°. For this wing, the span effectiveness 
factor e1 = 0.95. 
Solution 
From Fig. 2.6a, a0 = 0.105 per degree and OIL=O = -2.2°. The lift slope is given by Eq. (2.15). 
ao a = ------1 + a0 /(ne 1AR) 
where a and a0 are per radian. 
a0 = 0.105 per degree= (0.105)(57.3) = 6.02 per radian 
Hence, from Eq. (2.15), 
or 
6.02 a = = 4.51 per radian 1 + 6.02/(n(0.95)(6)] 
4.51 a = -- = 0.079 per degree 
57.3 
Cl= a(a -OIL=O) = 0.079(6- (-2.2)] = ~ 
Note: Comparing the above result for a finite wing with that for the airfoil as obtained in 
Example 2.3, we have for a = 6° 
Airfoil: 
Finite wing: 
c, = 0.85 
CL= 0.648 
As expected, the finite aspect ratio reduces the lift coefficient; in this case, for AR = 6, the 
reduction is by 24%-a nontrivial amount. For lower aspect ratios, the reduction will be even 
greater. 
What is the lift coefficient for the same wing at the same angle of attack as in Example 2.5, but 
for a free-stream Mach number of 0.7? 
Solution 
From Eq. (2.16), 
acomp= ~ 
v 1 - M'ic + ao/(rre1AR) 
where ao is the incompressible lift slope for the aiifoil and acomp is the compressible lift slope 
for the.finite wing. From Fig. 2.6a, a0 = 0.105 per degree= 6.02 per radian. Hence, 
6.02 
Gcomp = = 5.73 per radian 
jl - (0.7) 2 + 6.02/(rr(0.95)(6)] 

===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
C H A P T E R 2 <l Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Note: The finite aspect ratio reduces the lift slope, but the effect of compressibility increases the 
lift slope. In this example, the two effects almost compensate each other, and the compressible 
value of the finite-wing lift slope is almost the same as the incompressible value of the airfoil 
lift slope. The lift coefficient is given by 
where acomp = 5.73/57.3 = 0.1 per degree. Hence, 
CL= 0.1[6 - (-2.2)] = I 0.82 I 
Calculate the lift coefficient for a high-aspect-ratio straight wing with a thin symmetric airfoil 
at an angle of attack of 6° in a supersonic flow in Mach 2.5. 
Solution 
From Eq. (2.J 7), 
4 4 
Gcomp = J M;,, _ l = J (2_5)2 _ l = I. 746 per radian 
or 
l.746 
acomo = -- = 0.0305 per degree · 57.3 
Hence, 
Ci= acompll' = 0.0305(6) = I 0.183 I 
Note: Comparing this lift coefficient at Mach 2.5 with those obtained in Examples 2.5 and 2.6, 
we see that the magnitude of the supersonic lift coefficient is considerably smaller than that of 
the subsonic values (even taking into account the different zero-lift angles of attack). 
low·Asped·Ratio Stn1ight When applied to straight wings at AR < 4, Eq. 
(2.15) progressively yields poorer results as the aspect ratio is reduced. Why? The 
reason is that Eq. (2. is derived from a theoretical model which repiesents the finite 
wing with a single lifting line across the span of the wing. This is a good model when 
the aspect ratio is large; by examining the sketch in Fig. 2.25a, it is intuitively clear 
that a long, narrow wing planform might be reasonably modeled by a single lifting 
line from one wing tip to the other. However, when the aspect ratio is small, such 
as sketched in Fig. 2.25b, the same intuition leads to some misgivings-how can. a 
short, stubby wing be properly modeled by a single lifting line? The fact is-it cannot 
Instead of a single spanwise lifting line, the low-aspect-ratio wing must be modeled 
by a large number of spanwise vortices, each located at a different chordwise station, 
such as sketched in Fig. 2.25c. This is the essence of lifting surface theory. Today, the 
general concept of a lifting surface is the basis for a large number of panel codes­
elaborate computer programs which numerically solve for the inviscid aerodynamic 
wing properties-lift slope, zero-lift angle of attack, moment coefficients, and induced 
Example 2.7 

===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
86 P A,. R T l e Preliminary Considerations 
( 
Lifting line 
i 
I 
I I 
I I I 
Trailing vortices 
I I I 
(a) High-aspect-ratio wing. Lifting line is a 
reasonable representation of the wing. 
/Lifting line 
(b) Low-aspect-ratio wing. Lifting line 
is a poor representation of the wing. 
I 
(c) Low-aspect-ratio wing. Lifting surface 
is a better representation of the wing. 
figure 2.25 Contrast of lifting line and lifting surface models. 
drag coefficients (to be discussed shortly). Modern panel methods can quickly and 
accurately calculate the inviscid flow properties oflow-aspect-ratio straight wings, and 
every a_erospace company and laboratory have such panel codes in their "numerical 
tool box." '_fhere is an extensive literature on panel methods; for a basic discussion 
see Ref. 16, and for a more thorough presentation, especially for three-dimensional 
panel codes, see R~f. 22. 
An approximate relation for the lift slope for low-aspect-ratio straight wings was 
obtained by H.B. Helmbold in Germany in 1942 (Ref. 23). Based on a lifting surface 
solution for elliptic wings, Helmbold's equation .is 
I ao I 
I a~ Ji+ [ao/(nAR)]' + ao/(nAR) I 
Low-aspect-ratio 
straight wing 
(incompressible) 
where a and a0 are per radian. Equation (2.18a) is remarkably accurate for wings with 
AR < 4. This is shown in Fig. 2.26, which gives experimental data for the lift slope 
for rectangular wings as a function of AR from 0.5 to 6; these data are compared 
with _the predictions from Prandtl's lifting line theory, Eq. (2.15), and Helmbold's 

===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
C H A I' T E R 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
s~---,----,----,---~--~--~ 
Figure 2.26 
1 
2 
0 Experiment 
Prandtl & Betz (l 920) 
& others 
3 
Aspect ratio 
4 5 
lift slope for rectangular wings as a function 
of the aspect ratio. 
6 
equation, Eq. (2.18a). For subsonic compressible flow, Eq. (2.18a) is modified as 
follows (the derivation is given later, in our discussion of swept wings): 
ao 
acomp = -;:=========c------
Jl - M~ + [ao/(nAR)]2 +ao/(rrAR) 
where acomp and a0 are per radian. 
Subsonic 
low-aspect-ratio 
straight wing 
(compressible) 
[2.Hb] 
In the case of supersonic flow over a low-aspect-ratio straight wing, Eq. (2.17) 
is not appropriate. At low aspect ratios, the Mach cones from the wing tips cover a 
substantial portion of the wing, hence invalidating Eq. (2.17). Instead, Hoerner and 
Borst (Ref. 18) suggest the following equation, obtained from supersonic linearized 
theory for three-dimensional wings: 
acomp = 4 ( 1 - ---;:::1 ===) JM~ -1 2ARJM~ -1 
Supersonic 
low-aspect-ratio 
straight wing 
[2.1 Sc] 
where Ocomp is per radian. This equation is valid as long as the Mach cones from the 
two wing tips do not overlap. 
In airplane design, when are we concerned with low-aspect-ratio straight wings? 
The answer is, not often. Just scanning the pictures of the airplanes discussed in 
Chapter 1, the only airplane we see with a very low-aspect-ratio straight wing is 
the Lockheed F-104, shown in Fig. 1.30. A three-view of the F-104 is given in 
Fig. 2.27; the wing aspect ratio is 2.97. At subsonic speeds, a low-aspect-ratio wing 

===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
as 
Example 2.8 
P A R T 1 @ Preliminary Considerations 
,, 
" 
,, 
" 
Figure 'l..27 Three-view of the Lockheed F-104 S!arfighler. Aspect ratio= 2.94. 
is plagued by large induced drag, and hence subsonic aircraft (since World War I) do 
not have low-aspect-ratio wings. On the other hand, a low-aspect-ratio straight wing 
has low supersonic wave drag, and this is why such a wing was used on the F-104--the 
first military fighter designed for sustained Mach 2 flight. At subsonic speeds, and 
especially for takeoff and landing, the low-aspect-ratio wings were a major liability 
to the F-104. Fortunately, there are two other wing planforms that reduce wave drag 
without suffering nearly as large a penalty at subsonic speeds, namely, the swept wing 
and the delta wing. Hence, we will-now shift our attention to these planforms. 
Helmbold's equation for low-aspect-ratio straight wings, Eq. {2.18a), in the limit as the aspect 
ratio becomes very large, reduces to Eq. (2.15) for 
high-aspect-ratio straight wings. Indeed, 
Eq. (2.18a) can be viewed as a higher approximation that holds for both low- and high-aspect­
ratio straight wings, providing even greater accuracy than Eq. (2.15) for the high-aspect-ratio 
case, albeit the differences are small for high aspect ratios. To illustrate this, calculate the 
lift coefficient for the wing described in Example 2.5 at 6° angle of attack, using Helmbold's 
equation, and compare the results with those from Example 2.5 using Eq. (2.15). 
Solution 
From Example 2.5, a0 = 6.02 radian and AR = 6. Hence, 
a0 6.02 -- = - =0.319 nAR rr(6) 
From Eq. (2.18a), 
6.02 
a = ~===========::::~~~~~ Ji+ [a0/(rrAR)]2 +a0 /(nAR) JI+ (0.319) 2 + 0.319 
= 4.4 per radian 

===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
or 
4.4 a = 57.3 = 0.077 per degree 
Ci= a(a - ai=o) = 0.077[6 - (-2.2)] = / 0.629 / 
Compared to the result of Ci = 0.648 obtained in Example 2.5, the results obtained from Eqs. 
(2.15) and (2.18a) differ by only 3% for an aspect ratio of 6. 
Consider a straight wing of aspect ratio 2 with an NACA 2412 airfoil. Assuming low-speed 
flow, calculate the lift coefficient at an angle of attack of 6°. Assume e1 = 0.95. 
Solution 
This is the same set of conditions as in Example 2.5, except for a much smaller aspect ratio. 
We have 
~ = 6·02 = 0.955 7r R 7r(2) 
From Eq. (2.18a), 
or 
ao 6.02 
a = = --;::====----JI + [a0 /(7r AR)]2 + a0/(7r AR) Jl + (0.955) 2 + 0.955 
= 2.575 per radian 
. 2.575 a = -- = 0.0449 per degree 57.3 
Ci= a(a - ai=o) = 0.0449[6- (-2.2)] = I 0.368 I 
This result is to be compared with that from Example 2.5, where Ci = 0.648. In reducing the 
aspect ratio from 6 to 2, the lift coefficient is reduced by 43%-a dramatic decrease. 
' Calculate the lift coefficient for a straight wing of aspect of ratio 2 at an angle of attack of 6° 
in a supersonic flow at Mach 2.5. Assume a thin, symmetric airfoil section. 
Solution 
From Eq. (2.18c), 
acomp= ~(1- 2AR~) 
= J (2.5~2 _ 1 [ 1 - 2(2)J (;,5)2 _ 1 J = 1.555 per radian 
1.555 = -·-3 = 0.027 per degree 57. 
89 
Example 2.9 
Example 2. 10 

===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
90 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
CL = aa = 0.0027(6) = ~ 
Note: This result for a low-aspect-ratio wing at M00 = 2.5 is only IO% less than that obtained 
in Example 2. 7 for a high-aspect-ratio wing at the same Mach number. The aspect ratio effect 
on lift coefficient for supersonic wings is substantially less than that for subsonic wings. 
Swept Wings The main function of a swept wing is to reduce wave drag at transonic 
and supersonic speeds. Since the topic of this subsection is lift, let us examine the 
lifting properties of swept wings. 
Simply stated, a swept wing has a lower lift coefficient than a straight wing, 
everything else ·being equal. An intuitive explanation of this effect is as follows. 
Consider a straight wing and a swept wing in a flow with a free-stream velocity V00 , 
as sketched in Fig. 2.28a and b, respectively. Assume that the aspect ratio is high for 
both wings, so that we can ignore tip effects. Let u and w be the components of V 00 
perpendicular and parallel to the leading edge, respectively. The pressure distribution 
over the airfoil section oriented perpendicular to the leading edge is mainly governed 
by the chordwise component of velocity u; the spanwise component of velocity w 
has little effect on the pressure distribution. For the straight wing in Fig. 2.28a, the 
chordwise velocity component u is the full V 00 ; there is no spanwise component, that 
is, w = 0. However, for the swept wing in Fig. 2.28b, the chordwise component of 
velocity u is smaller than V00 , that is u = V00 cos A, .where A is the sweep angle 
shown in Fig. 2.28b. For the swept wing, the spanwise component of velocity w is a 
finite value, but it has little effect on the pressure distribution over the airfoil section. 
Since u for the swept wing is smaller than u for the straight wing, the difference in 
pressure between the top and bottom surfaces of the swept wing will be less than the 
difference in pressure between the top and bottom surfaces of the straight wing. Since 
lift is generated by these differences in pressure, the lift on the swept wing will be 
-----.:::s~!llne fJ. 
,-~~~~~~~--·,-----. 1rf01s. 
-~ ::~-J i ~- .. ., 
(a) Straight wing 
(b) Swept wing 
Figure 2.28 Effect of sweeping a wing. 

===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
C H A P T E R 2 e Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
less than that on the straight wing. Although this explanation is a bit naive because it 
ignores the details of the flow fields over both wings, it captures the essential idea. 
The geometry of a tapered swept wing is illustrated in Fig. 2.29. The wingspan b 
is the straight-line distance between the wing tips, the wing planform area is S, and the 
aspect ratio and the taper ratio are defined as before, namely, AR = b2 / S and taper 
ratio= c1/c,. For the tapered wing, the sweep angle A is referenced to the half-chord 
line, as shown in Fig. 2.29. (In some of the literature, the sweep angle is referenced 
to the quarter-chord line; however, by using the half-chord line as reference, the lift 
slope for a swept wing becomes independent of taper ratio, as discussed below.) 
Just as in the case of low-aspect-ratio straight wings, Prandtl's lifting line theory 
does not apply directly to swept wings. Hence, (2.15) does not apply to swept 
wi.ngs. Instead, the aerodynamic properties of swept wings at low speeds must be 
calculated from lifting surface theory (i.e., numerical panel methods) in the same spirit 
as in our discussion on low-aspect-ratio straight wings. However, for an approximate 
calculation of the lift slope for a swept finite wing, Kuchemann (Ref. 24) suggests 
the following awroach. From the discussion associated with Fig. 2.28, the lift slope 
for an infinite swept wing should be a0 cos where a0 is the lift slope for the airfoil 
section perpendicular to the leading edge. Replacing a0 in Helmbold's equation, 
Eq. {2.18a), with a0 cos we have 
Swept wing ~ aocosA , 
I a= J1 + [(aocosA)/(.irAR)F + (aocosA)/(.irAR) I (incompressible) 
[2.19] 
where a and ao are per radian. Equation (2.19) is an approximation for the incom­
pressible lift slope for a finite wing of aspect ratio AR and sweep angle A (referenced 
to the half-chord line). The subsonic compressibility effect is added to Eq. (2.19) by 
;:,w,ep1·w1ria geometry. 
AR= i 
. c, Taper rat10 = c, 
T 
91 

===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
replacing ao with ao/./1 - Moo,n, where Moo,n is the component of the free-stream 
Mach number perpendicular to the half-chord line of the swept wing, or M oo,n = 
M00 cos A. Letting fJ = Jl - M;;, cos2 A, we replace a0 in Eq. (2.19) with ao/ {J, 
obtaining 
(ao cos A)//J 
llcomp = . 
JI+ [(aocosA)/(irARfJ)F + (aocosA)/(:rrAR{J) 
Multiply both numerator and denominator in Eq. (2.20) by {J, we have 
aocosA 
llcomp = -;:==============--------J fJ2 + [(a0 cosA)/(:rrAR)] 2 + (a0 cosA)/(:rrAR) 
Recalling that fJ = JI - M;;, cos2 A, we can write Eq. (2.22)as 
aocosA llcomp = · ·· 
JI - M&:, cos2 A+ [(a0 cos A)/(:rrAR)]2 + {a0 cos A)/(:rrAR) 
Subsonic swept wing 
(compressible) 
[2.20] 
[2.21] 
[2.22] 
where acomp and ao are per radian. Note that Eq. (2.22) reduces to Eq. (2.18b) when 
. A = 0°; hence, the above derivation also constitutes a derivation of Eq. (2.I8b). 
The previous discussion on swept wings pertains to subsonic flow. For a swept 
wing moving at supersonic speeds, the aerodynamic properties depend on the location 
of the leading edge relative to a Mach wave emanating from the apex of the wing. 
For example, consider Fig. 2.30, which shows two wings with different leading-edge 
(b) Supersonic leading edge 
(a) Subsonic leading edge 
Figure 2.30 Illustration of subsonic and supersonic leading edges. 

===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
C H A P T E R 2 ~ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
sweep angles .in a flow with the same supersonic free-stream Mach number. The 
Mach angle µ is given by µ, = Arcsin In Fig. 2.30a, the wing leading edge 
is swept inside the Mach .;one, that is, A > µ. For this case, the component of M00 
perpendicular to the leading edge is subsonic; hence, the swept wing is said to have 
a subsonic leading edge. For the wing in supersonic flight, there is a weak shock 
that emanates from the apex, but there is no shock attached elsewhere along the wing 
leading edge. In contrast, in Fig. 2.30b, the wing leading edge is swept outside Lhe 
Mach cone, that is, A < J.l. For this case, the component of M00 perpendicular to 
the leading edge is supersonic; hence the swept wing is said to have a supersonic 
leading edge. For this wing in supersonic flight, there will be a shock wave attached 
along the entire leading edge. A swept wing with a subsonic leading edge behaves 
somewhat as a 
wing at subsonic speeds, although the actual freesstream Mach number 
is supersonic. That is, the top and bottom surfaces of the wing can communicate with 
each other in the vicinity of tht: leading edge, just as occurs in a purely subsonic 
flow. A swept wing with a supersonic leading edge, with its attached shock along the 
leading edge, behaves somewhat as a supersonic flat plate at the angle of attack. That 
is, the top and bottom surfaces of the wing do not communicate with each other. For 
these reasons, the aerodynamic properties of the two swept wings shown in Fig. 2.30 
are different. 
There is no convenient engineering formula for the rapid calculation of the lifting 
properties of a swept wing in supersonic flow. Most companies and laboratories use 
computational fluid dynamic techniques t~ calculate the pressure distribution over 
the wing, and then they find the lift by integrating the pressure distribution over the 
surface, taking the component of the resultant force perpendicular to the relative wind. 
In lieu of such detailed numerical calculations, Raymer (Ref. 25) suggests the use of a 
series of chai:ts prepared by the U.S. Air Force for quick, design-oriented calculations 
for swept wings. A sampling of these charts is given in Fig. 2.31, one each for the 
six different wing planforms shown in the figure. Each planform corresponds to a 
different taper ratio, denoted by A at the top of each chart. In Fig. 2.31, ALE is 
the leading-edge swept angle, fJ = J M&, - 1, and C N, is the slope of the normal 
force coefficient with angle of attack a. For ordinary supersonic cruising flight, we 
can readily assume that the normal force coefficient C N, is representative of the lift 
coefficient CL, that CL ~ f>N. The i;.e;.son for this is as follows. The dynamic 
pressure is given by 
Equation (2.23) shows that q00 ex it.f~, and hence the dynamic pressure can be large 
at supersonic Mach numbers. For an cruising at supersonic speeds in steady 
level flight, the Im is equal to the weight 
L = w = qoc,SCL 
93 

===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
94 
1 
6 
3 
TAN ALE (c 
(per rad) 
0 
Figure 2.:n 
P A R T 1 GI Preliminary Considerations 
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 l.0 .!! .6 A .2 
TAN A I.~ 
IJ 
(2) 
1 
t:~/ 
). .. 1/S 
"' IL r-,...1'.. "'r---,...r----. ... ATANAuL,... -;. 
~ ~t::-,.. r-,.. "' I'-.., r--,... ,....6_ 
~~ 
"' ~v -.. ~ s 
~ 
r-,... _4 
1-......r-,. . ~ r.; ~ 
_, --..,:-:-l. - - V 
~ 
$aN1c 
/_ 
- ..... 
I I 11. ·-..... '-. i-V j 
Ni:) lheo!'jl iAN I\ (cNlll L.,.v _,; V 
th'°J;; I ;::::'.-ti (cN ) hv Cl t COi)' 
V l,...-"... I 
.s v"'"" I ,_ ,.25 
I 
0 ,2 .4 .6 .II 1.0 .8 .6 ,4 
~ TAN AU; 
TAN Au, ti 
(b) 
4 
..... v.r 
rt - J 
'/-
I/ 
.2 
o-!tl 
3 
(c111a)theory 
2 (per rnd) 
I 
0 
0 
Normal-force-curve slope for supersonic wings. (From USAF DATCOM, Air force 
Flight Dynamics Lab,-Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio.) (continued) 
or 
Ci=_!_ 
qooS [2.24] 
From Eq. (2.24), when q00 is large, Ci is small. In tum, Ci is small when the angle 

===== PDF PAGE 108 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
(continued} 
7 I I I I I 7 
6 >. • 1/4 
i::/" -- - ........ ~ ....... r-,.... A TAN ALE 
~ 
-.. 
i..- r.r ---,........, ........ 
' ' ..... 
6 
s 
4 / .... 
"" .... 
--V"' ,.._ 
3 
TAN /\.LE ; CNa) theory 
(per rad) 
0 
0 .2 
7 
I 
UNsWi; 
,........, ,.._ -........ 
·1 ~ ........ 
-- -vr r--.... ~ 
J r-. r-- ~~ ,,, ~ i- J -So/t/j, / 
~ -£...~ ~ .-- J I 
4 
11 (cNa) theory 
3 (per rad) 
,-
--
~ ..... I'"·. / 
' I _ .... 
11 (cNa)t~~ :/ 
~ 
TAN/\. CNa) •It- -" V theorv- .-. 
I I I I 
.~: -v 
2 
0 . .4 .6 .8 1.0 .8 .6 .4 .2 0 
@ TAN ALE 
11 
(c) 
I I I I I 7 
s 
I 
! ! >. =
0
1 /3 ! 
w=· 
' 
' I r I : i 
. "1"'--. r-,.... A TAN ALE 
' - ~ 
·' ~ 
~ 
r-,.... I"'-, ....-6--~ ...... 
6 6 
s 
4 
3 
TAN ALE 
(per rad) 
0 
' / 
!/ r-- ..... ~ 1-........ - ~ 
~ o,._ 
r- ..... r-.... -4 
J1 -,........, r-.::: r:--: , .... .-3- ._ 
-
_i-- [// 
-UNSWEP·T"rE 2 .• 
~ 
V r- I--"''- V I ' r-,... / 
I ..... ,... _I I ~V. -I 
(c ) ~ ~Nier ~ ...,.i...-::, i- - ,,,v Na theory ! -f-.!: -' l I ,__ ....... t-o .. /j 'CN t) .,. 
·1 AN A CN ) , .. It-
.\ a theory 
V i..- ..... 
0/ theory- ,...,,,_r ~I---' 
! 
I 
0 .2 .4 .6 
@ 
-~S 
. 
.8 1.0 
(d) 
.8 .6 .4 
TAN /\.LE 
11 
I/ I ...... [7 
J 
V 
.2 
of attack is small. And when a is small, then CL ~ C N. Therefore, for normal design 
purposes, we can assume that CNa in Fig. 2.31 is the same as the lift slop~ dCif da. 
Finally, in each chart in Fig. 2.31, the different curves shown are for different values 
4 
/l (cNa) theory 
3 (per rad) 
2 
0 
0 
95 

===== PDF PAGE 109 =====
96 P A R T 1 3 Preliminary Considerations 
{concluded) 
3 
TAN ALE 
(e) 
7 7 
A-
A,:, l 
I .. 
A TAN An: .. 
6 6 
5 
-6- i-,.._ 
r -~ 
- 3 ...... ~- ~--- .....- VI .~ 
4 
3 
TAN ALE (CNa 
(per rad 
) lheory 
) 
TAN A CNa} t .. 1!1--jleorv 
f-r -
4__,, v V vv 
./ 
I V V [/ ./ '/ 
i.--lf ~ I) L/V I 
~ Na theory I/ 2 
I '-- i--.s-
i I :i'r 
0 
0 ' .2 .4 .o .8 l.O .8 
/3 
(f) 
·- I 
...... v 
~ 
i [ 
• .6 .4 
TAN /\lE 
(.l 
1/3 (C 
1 
' .2 0 
Na) theory 
(per rad) 
0 
of the parameter AR Tan AL£. To use Fig. 2.31 to find the lift slope for a given swept 
wing, carry out the following steps: 
L For the given wing, calculate fJ / Tan A LE. This is the abscissa on the left side 
of the charts. If this number is less than 1, use the left side. If the number is 

===== PDF PAGE 110 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
greater than 1, invert it, and use the right side of the charts, where the abscissa 
is (TanALE)/ {3. 
2. Pick the chart corresponding to the taper ratio ).. of the given wing. If).. is in 
between the values shown in the charts, interpolation between charts will be 
necessary. 
3. Calculate AR Tan ALE for the given wing. This is a parameter in the charts. 
Find the curve in the chart corresponding to the value of this parameter. Most 
likely, interpolation between two curves will be needed. 
4. Read the corresponding value from the ordinate; this value will correspond to 
Tan A LE ( C NJ if the left side of the chart is being used, and it will correspond 
to f3CNa ifthe right side is used. 
5. Extract CNa dividing the left ordinate by Tan ALE, or by dividing the right 
ordinate by {3, as the case may be. 
6. We assume that.the supersonic swept wing is thin, to minimize wave edge. 
Hence, to calculate lift, assume a flat surface wing, where L = 0 at a = 0°. 
Recalling our assumption that CL ~ C N, calculate CL from 
( a in radians) 
Consider a swept wing with a taper ratio of 0.5, leading edge sweep angle of 45°, and an aspect 
ratio of 3. Calculate the lift coefficient at Mach 2 at an angle of attack of 2°. 
Solution 
For taper ratio A equal to 0.5, use chart ( e) in Fig. 2.31. 
f3 = JM';.,--, 1 =:= ~ = 1.732 
Tan ALE = Tan 45° = 1 
Since f3 > Tan ALE, we wiH use the right side of chart (e). 
Tan ALE 1 .. · --- = -- = 0.577 f3 1.732 
Also, the parameter AR Tan ALE = (3)(1) = 3. In chart (e), find the curve corresponding 
to AR Tan ALE = 3. The point on this curve corresponding to the abscissa of 0.577 has the 
ordinate f3 ( C Na) = 4. Hence, 
C Na = i = 1. ;32 = 2.31 per radian 
Since a = 2° = 0.0349 rad, 
CL= CNaa = (2.31)(0.0349) = I 0.0806 I 
To go further with this calculation, assume the wing area is 3,900 ft2 , which is about that for 
the Concorde supersonic transport, Assume Mach 2 flight at a standard altitude of 50,000 ft, 
where p00 = 243.6 lb/ft2 • Let us calculate the lift generated by the wing for an angle of attack 
of 2°. From Eq. (2.23), 
97 
Example 2. 11 

===== PDF PAGE 111 =====
98 
Example 2. 12 
DESIGN CAMEO 
P A R T 1 @ Preliminary Considerations 
1 2 1.4 2 2 
qoo = zYPooM 00 = 2 (243.6)(2) = 682 lb/ft 
Hence, 
L = q00 SCL = (682)(3,900)(0.0806) = 214,400 lb 
Note: The maximum fuel-empty weight of the Concorde is 200,000 lb. Aithough we are by 
no means making a direct comparision here, the above calculation of the lift for our example 
wing for our example conditions shows that supersonic wings can produce a lot of lift at low 
angles of attack (hence with low values of the lift coefficient). 
For more details on the aerodynamics of supersonic wings, see the extensive discussion 
in chapter 11 of Ref. 26. 
Consider the wing described in Example 2.5, except with a sweep angle of 35°. Calculate the 
low-speed lift coefficient at 6° angle of attack and compare with the straight-wing results from 
Example 2.5. 
Solution 
From Eq. (2.19), 
or 
a0 cos A 
rrAR 
6.02 cos 35° ---- = 0.262 per radian 
rr(6) 
ao cos A 
a=--;==========--------y'l + [(a0 cosA)/(rrAR)]2 + (a0 cosA)/(rrAR) 
6.02 cos 35° ,. 
--;=====---- = 3.8057 per raman 
jI + (2.62) 2 + 0.262 
3.8057 a = -- = 0.0664 per degree 
57.3 
cl = a(a - C{l=O) = 0.0664[6 - (-2.2)] = I 0.544 I 
Note: The straight wing result from Example 2.5 is CL = 0.648. For this case, sweeping the 
wing by 35° decreases the lift coefficient by 16%. 
A swept wing is utilized in airplane design to reduce 
the transonic and supersonic wave drag-it is a 
design feature that is associated with high-speed 
airplanes. However, it is important for the designer to 
recognize that wing sweep is usually a detriment at 
low speeds. In the above example, we have seen that 
the low-speed lift coefficient is reduced by sweeping 
the wing. For the designer, this complicates the de­
sign of the airplane for good landing and takeoff per­
formance. To compensate, swept-wing airplanes are 
frequently designed with elaborate high-lift devices 
(multielement trailing-edge flaps, leading-edge flaps 
and slats, etc.). Such high-lift devices are discussed 
in Chapter 5. 

===== PDF PAGE 112 =====
c H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Delta Wings Swept wings that have planforms such as shown in Fig. 2.32 are called 
delta wings. Interest in delta wings for airplanes goes as far back as the early work 
done by Alexander Lippisch in Germany during the 1930s. Delta wings are employed 
on many aircraft designed. for supersonic flight, for example, the F-102 (Fig; 1.31) 
and the Concorde (Fig. 1.35). The supersonic lifting characteristics of delta wings are 
essentially given by the data in Fig. 2.31, which have already been discussed in the 
previous section. In this section we concentrate on the subsonic flow over delta wings. 
The flow field over a low-aspect-ratio delta wing at low speeds is completely 
different from that for a straight wing or a high-aspect-ratio swept wing. A qualita­
tive sketch of the flow field over a delta wing at angle of attack is given in Fig. 2.33. The 
(a) Simple delta (b) Cropped delta (c) Notched delta (d) Double delta 
Figure 2,32 Four versions of a delta-wing planform. (After Loftin, Ref. 13.) 
Primary attachment line A 1 
Primary separation line S1 
Figure 2.33 
Secondary separation line S2 
Schematic of the subsonic Row over the top of Ci delta wing at angle of attack. 
(Courtesy of John Stollery, Cranfield Institute of Technology, England.) 
99 

===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
100 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
dominant aspect of this flow is the two vortices that are formed along the highly swept 
leading edges, and that trail downstream over the top of the wing. This vortex pattern 
is created by the following mechanism. The pressure on the bottom surface of the 
wing is higher than the pressure on the top surface. Thus, the flow on the bottom 
surface in the vicinity of the leading edge tries to curl around the leading edge from 
the bottom to the top. If the leading edge is relatively sha...-p, the flow will separate 
along its entire length. This separated flow curls into a primary vortex above the 
wing just inboard of each leading edge, as sketched in Fig. 2.33. The stream surface 
which has separated at the leading edge (the primary separation line S1 in Fig. 2.33) 
loops above the wing and then reattaches along the primary attachment line (line A 
in Fig. 2.33). The primary vortex is contained within this loop. A secondary vortex 
is formed underneath the primary vortex, with its own separation line, denoted by S2 
in Fig. 2.33, and its own reattachment line A2 . 
Unlike many separated flows in aerodynamics, the vortex pattern over a delta 
wing shown in Fig. 2.33 is a friendly flow in regard to the production of lift The 
vortices are strong and generally stable. They are a source of high energy, relatively 
high vorticity flow, and the iocal static pressure in the vicinity of the vortices is small. 
Hence, the vortices create a lower pressure on the top surface than would exist if the 
vortices were not there. This increases the lift compared to what it would be without 
the vortices. The portion of the lift due to the action of the leading-edge vortices is 
called the vortex lift. A typical variation of CL for a delta wing as a function of angle 
of attack is shown in Fig. 2.34 (after Ref. 18). Here, low-speed experimental data 
are plotted for a delta wing with an aspect ratio of 1.46. Also shown is a theoretical 
calculation which assumes potential flow without the leading-edge vortices; this is 
identified as potential flow lift in Fig. 2.34. The difference between the experimental 
data and the potential flow lift is the vortex lift. The vortex lift is a major contributor 
to the overall lift; note that in Fig. 2.34 the vortex lift is about equal to the potential 
flow lift in the higher angles of attack. 
The lift curve in Fig. 2.34 illustrates three important characteristics of the lift of 
low-aspect-ratio delta wings: 
l. The lift slope is small, on the order of 0.05 per degree. 
2. The lift, however, continues to increase over a large range of angle of attack. In 
Fig. 2.34, the stalling angle of attack is about 35°. The net result is a reasonable 
value of CL.max, on the order of 1.35. 
3. The lift curve is nonlinear, in contrast to the linear variation exhibited by 
conventional wings for subsonic aircraft. The vortex lift is mainly responsible 
for this nonlinearity. 
The next time you have an opportunity to watch a delta-wing aircraft take off or 
land, for example, the televised !anding of the space shuttle, note the large angle of 
attack of the vehicle. Also, this is why the Concorde supersonic transport, with its 
low-aspect-ratio deltalike wing, lands at a high angle of attack. In fact, the angle of 
attack is so high that the front part of the fuselage must be mechanically drooped 
upon landing in order for the pilots to see the runway. 

===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
C H A P T E R 2 ~ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
l.4 
l.2 
l.0 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
0 
figure 2.34 
lO 
Theory-/ 
I 
I 
l 
l 
I . Percentage of 
cord forward T.E. 
r;J 100-
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 80-
1 
t..--Vortex breakdown 
\ position 
I 60-
1--.... 
I 
c;i 
I 
I 40-
~ Potential flow o 
lift I 
20-
20 30 40 50 
a 
Lift coefficient curve for a delta wing in low-speed 
subsonic Row. (After Hoerner and Borst, Ref. 18.) 
Kuchemann (Ref. 24) describes an approximate calculation for the normal force 
coefficient C N for slender delta wings at low speeds. Defining the length l and the 
semi span s as shown in Fig. 2.35, the quantity a/ (s / l) becomes a type of similarity 
parameter which allows normal force data for delta wings of different aspect ratios to 
collapse approximately to the same curve. In Fig. 235, C N / (s / l)2 is plotted versus 
a/ (s / l), and the several sets of experimental data shown in this figure follow the 
HH 

===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
!Example 2.13 
P A R T l @ Preliminary Considerations 
20 ,--~~~~~~~-.~~~~~~~~,--~~~~~~--, 
I Experiments 
A Brown & Michael {1954) 
V Fink & Taylor (1955) 
s/1 
0.088 
0.18 
Eq. (2.25) 
Theory 
l::l Marsden et al. (l 958) 0.36 
cJ(7)2 10 
Smith (1966)1 
0 
2r.-fh 
0 0.5 l.O l.5 
Figure 2.35 Normal forces on slender delta wings. (After Kuchemann, Ref. 24.) 
same trend. Moreover, the experimental data are in reasonable agreement with the 
approximate analytical result of J. H.B. Smith, given by 
CN (OI) (a)l.7 ---2rr - 49 -(s/[)2 - s/l; + · s/l Low-speed delta wing [2.25] 
where a is in radians. Note that Eq. (2.25) shows C N as a nonlinear function of angle 
of attack, consistent with the experimental data for delta wings. 
Using Eq. (2.25), calculate the low-speed lift coefficient of a delta wing of aspect ratio 1.46 at 
an angle of attack of 20°. This is the same delta wing for which the experimental data in Fig. 
2.34 apply. Compare the calculated result with the data shown in Fig. 2.34. 
Solution 
From the geometry of the triangular planform shown in Fig. 2.35, the planform area Sis given 
by 
l S = -(2s)/ = sl 
2 
The value of s / l is determined by the aspect ratio as follows. 
b2 (2s )2 4s2 s 
AR= - = -- = - =4-S sl sl I 

===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
C H A P T E R 2 ® Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Hence, 
~=AR = 1.46 = 0.365 
l 4 4 
The angle of attack a, in radians, is 
Hence, 
From Eq. (2.25), 
Thus, 
20 
a = -- = 0.349 rad 57.3 
a 0.349 - = -- =0.956 
s / I 0.365 
C N ( a \ ( 0/ ) 1.7 
--· = 2rr - I + 4.9 -
(s//)2 · s/l} s/1 
= 2rr(0.956) + 4.9(0.956) 17 = 10.57 
cN = 10.57 Gr= J0.57(0.365)2 = l.408 
cl= CN COSOI = l.408cos20° = ~ 
The experimental data in Fig. 2.34 give a value of Cl = 0.95 at a= 20°; the accuracy of 
(2.25) is within 39% for this case. Equation (2.25) is in better agreement with the different 
experimental data shown in Fig. 2.35. 
2.8.2 Wing-Body Combinations 
We normally think of wings as the primary source for lift for airplanes, and quite 
rightly so. However, even a pencil at an angle of attack will generate lift, albeit small. 
Hence, lift 
is produced by the fuselage of an airplane as well as the wing. The mating 
of a wing with.a fuselage is called a wing-body combination. The lift of a wing-body 
combina_tion is not obtained by simply adding the lift of the wing alone to the lift 
of the body alone. Rather, as soon as the wing and body are mated, the flow field 
over the body modifies the flow field over the wing, and vice versa-this is called the 
wing-body interaction. 
There is no accurate analytical equation which can predict the lift of a wing-body 
combination, properly taking into account the nature of the wing-body aerodynamic 
interaction. Either the configuration must be tested in a wind tunnel, or a compu­
tational fluid dynamic calculation must be made. We cannot even say in advance 
whether the combined lift will be greater or smaller than the sum of the two parts. 
However, for subsonic speeds, we can take the following approach for preliminary 
airplane performance and design considerations. Figure 2.36 shows data obtained 
from Hoerner and Borst (Ref. ,J 8) for a circular fuselage-midwing combination, as 
sketched at the top of the figure. The diameter of the fu'selage is d, and the wingspan 
103 

===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
104 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
-d- Spanb 
Figure 2.36 
dCJda 
(dCJda) 0 1.2 .... ---·· 
0.8 
',.._ ·-1......_ Total 
'-..0...... ·'·-!:..=,3 to lO 
o ...... 
0.4 
...... 
I ... t Lift induced on body 
ncremen... l 
on wint ...... 
due to ... , 
crossflow 
...................... 
............ 
0 '--~~~-'---~-+~--'-~~~~'--~~~-'-~....;:::,=--, 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
dlb 
The lift-curve slope of wing-fuselage combinations as a function of the 
diameter ratio d/b. (After Hoerner and Borst, Ref. 18.) 
is b. The lift slope of the wing-body combination, denoted by dCi/da, divided by 
the lift slope of the wing alone, denoted by (dCi/da)o, is shown as a function of 
d/b. The magnitudes of the three contributions to the lift are ideniifiedin Fig. 2.36 
as ( 1) the basic lift due to exposed portions of the wing, (2) the increase in lift on the 
wing due to crossflow from the fuselage acting favorably on the pressure distribution 
on the wing, and (3) the lift on the fuselage, taking into account the interaction effect 
with the wing flow field. The interesting result shown in this figure is that, for a 
range of d/b from O (wing only) to 6 (which would be an inordinately fat fuselage 
with a short, stubby wing); the total lift for the wing-body combination is essentially 
constant (within about 5%). Hence, the lift of the wing-body combination can be 
treated as simply the lift on the complete wing by itself, including that portion of the 
wing that is masked by the fuselage. · This is illustrated in Fig. 2.37. In other words, 
the lift of the wing-body combination shown in Fig. 2.37a can be approximated by 
the lift on the wing of planform area S shown in Fig. 2.37b. This is the same as saying 
that the wing lift is effectively carried over by the fuselage for that part of the wing that 
is masked by the fuselage. For subsonic speeds, this is a reasonable approximation 
for preliminary airplane performance and design considerations. Hence, in all our 
future references to the planform area of a wing of an airplane, it will be construed 

===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
Figure 2.37 
C H A P T E R 2 ~ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Lift on wing-body 
combination 
(s) 
I I 
I 
I \ 
\ : 
I I 
I I 
\ I .., 
About the same as the lift on the 
wing of planform area S, which 
includes that.part of the wing 
masked by the fuselage 
(b) 
Significance of !he conventional definition of wing planform area. 
as the area S shown in Fig. 2.37b, and the lift of the wing-body combination will be 
considered as the lift on the wing alone of area S. 
Wing-body interactions at supersonic speed can involve complex shock wave 
interactions and impingements on the surface. We will make no effort here to examine 
such interactions. In practice, we must usually depend on wind tunnel tests and/or 
computational fluid dynamic calculations for the aerodynamic properties of such 
supersonic configurations. 
2.8.3 Drag 
When you watch an airplane flying overhead, or when you ride in an airplane, it is 
almost intuitive that your first aerodynamic thought is about lift. You are witnessing 
a machine that, in straight and level flight, is producing enough aerodynamic lift to 
equal the weight of the machine. This keeps it in the air-a vital concern. Indeed, 
in Sections 2.8.1 and 2.8.2, we discuss the production of lift at some length. But 
this is only part of the role of aerodynamics. It is equally important to produce this 
lift as efficiently as possible, dmt is, with as little drag as possible. The ratio of 
lift to drag L / D is a good measure of aerodynamic efficiency. In Section 2.1 we 
mentioned that a barn door will produce lift at angle of attack, but it also produces a 
lot of drag at the same time-the L / D for a barn door is terrible. For such reasons, 
minimizing drag has been one of the strongest drivers in the historical development 
of applied aerodynamics. In airplane performance and design, drag is perhaps the 
most important aerodynamic quantity. The purpose of this section is to focus your 
thoughts on drag ~nd to provide some methods for its estimation. 
The subject of drag has been made confusing historically because so many dif­
ferent types of drag have been defined and discussed over the years. However, we 
can easily cut through this confusion by recalling the discussion in Section 2.2. There 

===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
P A R T 1 ei Preliminary Considerations 
are only two sources of aerodynamic force on a body moving through a fluid-the 
pressure distribution and the shear stress distribution acting over the body surface. 
Therefore, there are only two general types of drag: 
Pressure drag--<lue to a net imbalance of surface pressure acting in the drag 
direction 
Friction drag--due to the net effect of shear stress acting in the drag direction 
All the different types of drag that have been defined in the literature fall in one or 
the other of the above two categories. It is important to remember this. 
It is also important to recognize that the analytical prediction of drag is much 
harder and more tenuous than that of lift. Drag is a different kind of beast-it is 
driven in large part by viscous effects. Closed-form analytical expressions for drag 
exist only for some special cases. Even computational fluid dynamics is much less 
reliable for drag predictions than for lift Indeed, in a recent survey by Jobe (Ref. 27), 
the following comment is made: 
Except for the isolated cases of drag due to lift at small angle of attack and supersonic 
wave drag for smooth, slender bodies, drag prediction is beyond the capability of 
current numerical aerodynamic models. 
However, faced with this situation, people responsib1e for airplane design and analysis 
have assimilated many empirical data on drag, and have synthesized various method­
ologies for drag prediction. About these methodologies, Jobe (Ref. 27) states: 
Each has its own peculiarities and limitations. Additionally each airframe manufac­
turer has compiled drag handbooks that are highly prized and extremely proprietary. 
Hence, in this section we will be able to provide analytical formulas for only a 
few aspects of drag prediction. In lieu of such formulas, we will explore some of 
the empirical aspects of drag, and hopefully will give you some idea of what can be 
done to predict drag for purposes of preliminary performance analyses and conceptual 
design of airplanes. 
We organized our discussion of lift in Sections 2.8.1 and 2.8.2 around different 
wing and body shapes. The effect of Mach number for each shape was dealt with 
in tum. However, the physical nature of drag, as well as its prediction, is more 
fundamentally affected by Mach number than is lift. Therefore, we will organize our 
discussion of drag around the different Mach-number regimes: subsonic, transonic, 
and 
supersonic. 
Subsonic Drag 
Airfoils Let us first consider the case of drag on a two-dimensional airfoil shape 
in subsonic flow. We have already discussed this matter somewhat in Section 2.5; 
variations of the airfoil drag coefficient are shown in Figs. 2.6b, 2.9, 2.11, and 2.18. 
Return to Fig. 2.18, for example, where the drag coefficient for an NACA 64-212 
airfoil is shown as a function of ct, and hence as a function of ct (due to the linear 

===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
variations of c1 with a). The drag ~oefficient in this figure is labeled the section drag 
coefficient; it is also frequently called the profile drag coefficient. Profile drag is a 
combination of two types of drag: 
P fil d [ skin°friction] [pressure dra_g due] roe rag= + . drag to flow separat10n 
Skin-friction drag is self-explanatory; it is due to the frictional shear stress acting 
on the surface of the airfoil. Pressure drag due to flow separation is caused by the . 
imbalance of the pressure distribution in the drag direction when the boundary layer 
separates from the airfoil surface. (Note that, for an inviscid flow with no flow sepa­
ration, theoretically the pressure distribution on the back portion of the airfoil creates 
a force pushing forward, whic_h is exactly balanced by the pressure distribution on 
the front portion of _the airfoil pushing backward. Hence, in a subsonic inviscid flow 
over a two-dimensional body, there is no net pressure drag on the airfoil-this phe­
nomenon is called d'Alembert's paradox after the eighteenth-century mathematician 
who first obtained the result In contrast, when the flow separates from the airfoil, 
the integrated pressure distribution becomes unbalanced between the front and back 
parts of the airfoil, producing a net drag force. This is the pressure drag due to flow 
separation.) Frequently, the pressure drag due to flow separation is called. simply the 
form drag. In coefficient form, we have 
= + 
( Profile ) = ( skin-friction ) + 
drag coefficient drag coefficient 
Cd,p 
( 
form drag coefficient, ) 
or pressure drag coefficient 
due to flow separation 
[2.26] 
For relatively thin airfoils and wings, cf can be approxima.ted by formulas for 
a flat plate. But even here there are major uncertainties in i:egard to the transition of 
laminar flow to turbulent flow in the boundary layer: Turbulence is still a major un­
solved problem in classical physics, and the prediction of where on a surface transition 
occurs. is uncertain. For a purely laminar flow, cf for a flat plate in incompressible 
flow is given by 
1.328 
c1=--
5e 
laminar [2.27] 
where CJ= Dtf(q 00 S), Re = p00 V00 c/µ 00 , Dt is the friction drag on one side 
of the flat plate, S is the planform area of the plate, c is the length of the plate in 
the flow direction (the chord length for an airfoil), and p00 , V00 , and µ 00 are the 
free-stream density, velocity, and viscosity coefficient, respectively. Equation (2.27) 
is an exact theoretical relation for laminar incompressible flow over a flat plate. No 
such exact result exists for turbulent flow. Instead, a number of different approximate 
relations have been developed over the years. The results of various empirical flat­
plate formulas for incompressible turbulent flow are shown in Fig. 2.38, where cf is 
plotted versus Re. For reference, the Karman-Schoenherr curve shown in Fig. 2.38 
107 

===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
108 P A R T 1 111 Preliminary Considerations 
0.0044 ,----,------.-----~-----~----, 
---- Karman-Schoenherr 
- - - - Spalding-Chi 
0.0040 --··· - Prandt!-Schlicting 
I - - -- Schultz-Grunow 
I · - - - - - Winter-Gaudet 
0.00361 \., 
I I-~-
0.0032 ~ I ··~ I RN=3 x 106 ~ 
Cf I ·., 
I ~ 
0.0028 r ... 
I ~ 
0.0024 r -. ~--
1 --~ 
I ~ 
' -~ 
RN ,;, 40 X 106 ""'--~ 
~-~ 
0.0020 
0.0016 ,___ __ _,__ __ _,__ __ _._ __ ........._ __ __. __ _, 
6.2 
figure 2.38 
6.6 7.0 7.4 7.8 8.2 
Log (Reynolds number) 
Variation of incompressible turbulent skin-friction 
coefficient for a Aal plate as a function of Reynoids 
number. 
is obtained from the relation 
turbulent 
8.6 
[2.28] 
which is one of the most widely used formulas for estimating turbulent flat-plate 
skin friction. The calculation of c1 from Eq. (2.28) must be done implicitly. Jobe 
(Ref. 27) recommends an alternate formula developed by White and Christoph in 
which c 1 is more easily calculated in an explicit manner from 
0.42 
c1=~----
In2(0.056 Re) 
[2.29] 
Equation (2.29) is claimed to be accurate to ±4% in the Reynolds number range 
from 105 to l 09 . However, there remains the question as to where to apply the above 
formulas, which is a matter of where transition occurs. Equation (2.27) is valid as 
long as the flow is completely laminar. Equations (2.28) and (2.29) are applicable 
as long as the flow is completely turbulent. The latter is a reasonable assumption 
for most conventional airplanes in subsonic flight; the flow starts out laminar at the 
leading edge, but at the high Reynolds numbers normally encountered in flight, the 

===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
C H A P T E R 2 o Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
extent of laminar flow is very small, and transition usually occurs very near the leading 
edge-so close that we can frequently assume that the surface is completely covered 
with a turbulent boundary layer. The location at which transition actually occurs on 
the surface is a function of a number of variables; suffice it to say that the transition 
Reynolds number is 
P00 Rerrans = ---- ~ 350,000 to l 
µ00 
for low-speed where Xrr is the distance of the transition point along the surface 
measured from the leading edge. Generally, a predicted value of Xrr is quite uncertain. 
For this reason, many preliminary drag estimates simply assume that the boundary 
layer is turbulent starting right at the leading edge. 
To return to Eq. (2.26), the analytical prediction of cd.p, the form drag coefficient, 
is still a current research question. No simple equations exist for the estimation of 
cc1.p, nor does computational fluid dynamics always give the right answer. Instead, 
cc1.p is usually found from experiment. [What really happens is that the net profile 
drag coefficient cc1 in Eq. (2.26) is measured, such as given in Fig. 2.18, and then cd,p 
can be backed out of Eq. (2.26) if a reasonabie estimate of c I exists.] 
At subsonic speeds below the drag-divergence Mach number, the variation of CJ 
with Mach number is very small; indeed, for a first approximation it is reasonable to 
assume that cc1 is relatively constant across the subsonic Mach number range. This is 
reflected in the left-hand side of Fig. 2.11. 
Finite Wings Consider the subsonic drag on a finite wing. This drag is more than just 
the profile drag. The same induced flow effects due to the wing-tip vortices that were 
discussed in Section 2.8.1 result in an extra component of drag on a three-dimensional 
lifting body. This extra drag is called induced drag. Induced drag is purely a pressure 
drag. His caused by the wing tip vortices which generate an induced, perturbing flow 
field over the wing, which in turn perturbs the pressure distribution over the wing 
surface in such a way that the integrated pressure distribution yields an increase in 
drag-the induced drag D;. For a high-aspect-ratio straight wing, Prandtl's lifting 
line theory shows that the induced drag coefficient, defined by 
is given by 
D; 
qooS 
cz C. - __ L_ 
D, - rreAR 
where e is the span efficiency factor, given by 
e=--1+8 
[2.30] 
[2.31] 
In Eq. (2.31 ), 8 is calculated from lifting line theory. H is a function of aspect ratio 
and taper ratio and is plotted in Fig. 2.39. Note that 8 ~ l, so that e :::= 1. Examining 
109 

===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
110 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
d 
figure 2.39 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
Taper ratio c/c, 
Induced drag factor as a function of loper ralio for wings of different aspect 
ratios. 
Eq. (2.30), we see that it makes physical sense that CD, should be a function of the 
lift coefficient (and a strong function, at that, varying as the square of CL). This 
is because the generation of wing-tip vortices is associated with a higher pressure 
over the bottom of the wing and a lower pressure over the top of the wing-the same 
mechanism that produces lift. Indeed, it would 
be naive for us to assume that lift is 
free. The induced drag is the penalty that is paid for the production of lift. Imagine, 
for example, a Boeing 747 weighing 500,000 lb in a straight and level flight. The 
airplane is producing 500,000 lb of lift. This costs money-the money to pay for 
the extra fuel consumed by the engines in producing the extra thrust necessary to 
overcome the induced drag. 
If our objective is to reduce the induced drag, Eq. (2.30) shows us how to do it 
First, we want e to be as close to unity as possible. The value of e is always less 
than l except for a wing that has a spanwise lift distribution that varies elliptically 
over the span, for which e = l. However, as seen in Fig. 2.39, 8 is usually on the 
order of 0.05 or smaller for most wings, which means that e varies between 0.95 and 
1.0-a relatively minor effect. Therefore, trying to design a wing that will have a 
spanwise lift distribution that is as close to elliptical as possible may not always be an 
important feature. Rather, from Eq. (2.30), we see that the aspect ratio plays a strong 
role; if we can double the aspect ratio, then we can reduce the induced drag by a factor 

===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
of 2. The fact that increasing the aspect ratio reduces the induced drag also makes 
physical. sense. Since AR = b2 / S, for a wing or'fixed area, increasing the aspect 
ratio moves the wing tips farther from the center of the wing. Since the strength of 
the induced flow due to the wing-tip vortices decays. with lateral distance from each 
vortex, the farther removed the vortices, the weaker the. overall induced flow effects 
ruid hence the smaller the indµced drag. Thus, the clear message from Eq. (2.30) is 
that increasing the aspect ratio is the major factor in reducing the induced drag. 
If aerodynamics were the only consideration in the design of an airplane, all 
subsonic aircraft .would have wings with extremely large aspect ratios in order to 
reduce the induced drag-the wings would look like slats from a venetian blind. 
However, in order to make such a long, narrow wing structurally sound, the weight of 
the internal wing structure would be prohibitive. As a design compromise, the aspect 
ratios of most· subsonic aircraft range betweeQ 6 and 9. The following is a list of the 
aspect ratios of some classic subsonic airplanes. 
Airplane 
Lockheed Vega (Fig. 1.19) 
Douglas DC-3 (Fig. 1.22) 
Boeing 747 (Fig. 1.34) 
Aspect Ratio 
6.11 
9.14 
7.0 
Some special-pwpose aircraft have larger aspect ratios. Sailplanes have aspect ratios 
that range from 10 to about 30. For example, the Schweizer SGS 1-35 has an aspect 
ratio of 23.3. The Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance aircraft (Fig. 2.40) has as aspect 
ratio of 14.3 and is capable of flying as high as 90,000 ft. [Reducing the induced 
drag for the U-2 was of paramount importance. At very high altitudes, where the 
Figure 2 • .40 Lockheed U-2. 
111 

===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
Example 2. 14 
DESIGN CAMEO 
P A R T 1 @ Preiiminary Considerations 
air density is low, the U~2 generates its lift by flying at high values of From Eq. 
(2.30), the induced drag is going to be large. To minimize this effect, the designers 
of the U-2 exerted every effort to make the aspect ratio as large as vv,xwv,,., 
We end this discussion about induced drag by noting that, i.n England, induced 
drag is usually called vortex drag. For some reason, this terminology has not been 
picked up in the United States. The term induced drag was coined by Ludwig Prandtl 
and Max Munk at Gottingen University in Germany in 1918, and we have ca.'lied on 
with this tradition to the present This author feels that the descriptor vortex drag is 
much more explicit as to its source and is therefore preferable. However, in this book 
we continue with tradition and use the label induced drag. 
Consider the wing described in Example 2.5. For low-speed flow, calculate the lift-to-drag 
ratio for this wing at 6° angle of attack. Assume the span efficiency factor e is 0.95. 
Solution 
The induced drag coefficient is given by Eq. (2.30). From Example 2.5, at a 6°, 
CL = 0.648. Hence, from Eq. (2.30), 
Cz (0.648) 2 
Co.= -- = = 0.0234 ' neAR rr(0.95)(6) 
The_sum of the skin friction and form drag (pressure drag due to flow separation for the wing) 
is approximately given by the airfoil profile drag coefficient, plotted in Fig. 2.6b. From these 
data, when the airfoil is at 6° angle of attack (c1 = 0.85), the value of cd is 0.0076 (assuming a 
Reynolds number on the order of 9 x 106 ). Hence, for the finite wing, the total drag coefficient 
is given by 
The lift-to-drag ratio is 
Co= cd + Cv; = 0.0076 + 0.0234 = 0.0312 
L CL 0.648 ~ 
D = Cv = 0.031 = ~ 
Note: Recall from Example 2.3 that for the airfoil at a = 6°, L/ D = l 11.8, much higher 
than that for the finite wing. The dramatic reduction of L/ D between the airfoil value and the 
finite-wing value is completely due to the finite-wing induced drag. 
l 
Aspect ratio is one of the most important design 
features of an airplane. For subsonic airplane design, it 
is a major factor in determining the maximum value of 
L / D at cruise conditions, which in turn has a major i~­
pact on the maximum range of an airplane ( discussed in 
Chapter 5). Everything else being equal, the higher the 
aspect ratio, the higher the maximum L / D. Of course, 
in any airplane design process, not everything else is 
equal. As noted earlier, as the design aspect ratio is 
increased, the wing st.'1lcture must be made stronger. 
This increases the weight of the airplane, which is an 
undesirable feature. So the airplane designer is faced 
(continued) 

===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
with a compromise--one of many in the airplane design 
process (as discussed in Chapters 7 and 8). However, 
the point made here is that, during the interactive design 
process, if it becomes important to increase the design 
value of the maximum L / D, then one of the powerful 
tools available to the designer is an increase in aspect 
·· ratio. 
Fuselages The fuselage by itself experiences substantial drag-a combination of 
skin-friction drag and pressure drag due to flow separation. The skin-friction drag 
is a direct function of the wetted surf ace area Sw, which is the area that would get 
wet if the fuselage were immersed in water. This makes physical sense because the 
shear stress is tugging at every square inch exposed to the airflow. The reference area 
used to define the drag coefficient is usually not the wetted surface area, 'f hich is 
fine because the reference area is just that-a reference quantity. But for some of our 
subsequent discussions it is useful to realize that the actual value of the aerodynamic 
skin-friction drag physically depends on the actual wetted surface area. 
When the fuselage is mated to a wing and other appendages, the net drag is 
usually not the direct sum of the individual drags for each part. For example, the 
presence of the wing affects the airflow over the fuselage, and the fuselage affects 
the airflow over the wing. This sets up an interacting flow field over both bodies 
which changes the pressure distribution over both bodies. The net result is usually an 
increase in the pressure drag; this increase is called interference drag. Interference 
drag is almost always positive-the net drag of the combined bodies is almost always 
greater than the sum of the drags of the individual parts. 
The prediction of interference drag is primarily based on previous experimental 
data. There are no analytical; closed-form expressions for such drag. 
Summary For subsonic drag, the following definitions for different contributions 
to the total drag are summarized below. 
Skin-friction drag: Drag due to frictional shear stress integrated over the 
surface. 
Pressure drag due to flow separation (form drag): The drag due to the pressure 
imbalance in the drag direction caused by separated flow. 
Profile drag: The sum of skin friction drag and form drag. (The term profile 
drag is usually used in conjunction with two-dimensional airfoils; it is 
sometimes called section drag.) 
Interference drag: An additional pressure drag caused by the mutual 
interaction of the flow fields around each component of the airplane. The total 
drag of the combined body is usually greater than that of the sum of its 
individual parts; the difference is the interference drag. 
Parasite drag: The term used for the profile drag for a complete airplane. It is 
that portion of the total drag associated with skin friction and pressure drag due 
to flow separation, integrated over the complete airplane surface. It includes 
interference drag. We have more to say about parasite drag in Section 2.9. 
113 

===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
114 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Induced drag: A pressure drag due to the pressure imbalance in the drag 
direction caused by the induced flow (downwash) associated with the vortices 
created at the tips of finite wings. 
'Zero-lift drag: (Usually used in conjunction with a complete airplane 
configuration.) The parasite drag that exists when the airplane is at its zero-lift 
angle of attack, that is, when the lift of the airplane is zero. We elaborate in 
Section 2.9. 
Drag due to lift: (Usually used in conjunction with a complete airplane.) That 
portion of the total airplane drag measured above the zero-lift drag. It consists 
of the change in parasite drag when the airplane is at an angle of attack different 
from the zero-lift angle, plus the induced drag from the wings and other lifting 
components of the airplane. We elaborate in Section 2.9. 
The items summarized above are the main categories of drag. They need not be 
confusing as long as you keep in mind their physical source; each one is due to either 
skin friction or a pressure imbalance in the drag direction. As you begin to look at 
the airplane in greater detail, the above categories are sometimes broken down into 
more detailed subcategories. Here are a few such examples: 
External store drag: An increase in parasite drag due to external fuel tanks, 
bombs, rockets, etc., carried as payload by the airplane, but mounted externally 
from the airframe. 
L(lnding gear drag: An increase in parasite drag when the landing gear is 
deployed. 
Protuberance drag: An increase in parasite drag due to "aerodynamic 
blemishes" on the external surface, such as antennas, lights, protruding rivets, 
and rough or misaligned skin panels. 
Leakage drag: An increase in parasite drag due to air leaking into and out of 
holes and gaps in the surface. Air tends to leak in where the external pressure 
distribution is highest and to leak out where the external pressure distribution is 
lowest. 
Engine cooling drag: An increase in parasite drag due to airflow through the 
internal cooling passages for reciprocating engines. 
Flap drag: An increase in both parasite drag and induced drag due to the 
deflection of flaps for high-lift purposes. 
Trim drag: The. induced drag of the tail caused by the tail lift necessary to 
balance the pitching moments about the airplane's center of gravity. In a 
conventional rear-mounted tail, the lift of the tail is frequently downward to 
acl)ieve this balance. When this is the case, the wing must produce extra lift to 
counter the downward lift on the tail; the resulting increase in the wing induced 
drag is then included in the trim drag. 
This list can go on almost 
indefinitely. A good example of the drag buildup on 
a typical subsonic airplane is shown in Fig. 2.41. Here, we start with a completely 

===== PDF PAGE 128 =====
CHAPTER 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 11.5 
Airplane condition Com!.ifo:m Co llCD, 
number Description (CL=0.15) llCD 1( 
~ ~ 
Completely faired condition, 0.0166 
long nose fairing 
~ ~ 
2 Completely faired condition, 0.0169 
blunt nose fairing 
3 Original cowling added, no 0.0186 0.0020 12.0 
~ ~ 
.,.. 
airflow through cowling .0$ 
4 Landing-gear seals and 0.0188 0.0002 1.2 
~ ~ 
fairing removed 
5 Oil cooler installed 0.0205 0.0017 10.2 
6 Canopy fairing removed 0.0203 -0.0002 -1.2 
~ ~ 
7 Carburetor air scoop added 0.0209 0.0006 3.6 
8 Sanded walkway added 0.0216 0.0007 4.2 
9 Ejector chute added 0.0219 0.0003 1.8 
~ ~ 
10 Exhaust stacks added 0.0225 0.0006 3.6 
ll J:ntercooler added 0.0236 O.OOll 6.6 
12 Cowling exit opened 0.0247 O.OOll 6.6 
~ ~ 
13 Accessory exit opened 0.0252 0.0005 3.0 
14 Cowling fairing and seals 0.0261 0.0009 5.4 
~ ~ 
removed 
15 Cockpit ventilator opened 0.0262 0.0001 0.6 
16 Cowling venturi installed 0.0264 0.0002 l.2 
~ ~ 
17 Blast tubes added 0.0267 0.0003 1.8 
18 Antenna installed 0.0275 0.0008 4.8 
Total 0.0109 
. aPercentages based on comple!ely faired condition with long nose fairing. 
Figure 2.41 The breakdown of various sources of drag on a late 1930s airplane, the Seversky XP-41. [Experimental d!!i!e-­
from Paul J. Coe, "Review of Drag Cleanup Tests in the Longley Full-Scale Tunnel (from 1935 to 1945) 
Applicable lo Current General Aviation Airplanes," NASA TN-D-8206, 1976.] 
streamlined basic configuration (condition l in Fig. 2.41), where the drag coefficient 
(for CL = 0.15) is 0.0166. Conditions 2 through 18 progressively add various 
practical aspects to the basic configuration, and the change in drag coefficient for 
each addition as well as the running total drag are tabulated at the right in Fig. 2.41. 
For the complete configuration (condition 18), the total drag coefficient is 0.0275. 
Transonic Drag Shock waves-that is the difference between transonic flow and 
purely subsonic flow. In a transonic flow, even though the free-stream Mach number 
is less than 1, local regions of supersonic flow occur over various parts of the airplane, 
and these local supersonic pockets are usually terminated by the presence of shock 
waves. This phenomenon has already been discussed in conjunction with airloils 
and sketched in Fig. 2.11. Return to Fig. 2.11; we see the qualitative variation of cd 
versus M 00 , and the prominent transonic drag rise near Mach 1. This drag rise is due 
to the presence of shock waves, as shown in Fig. 2.11; it is exclusively a pressure 

===== PDF PAGE 129 =====
116 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
drag effect. It occurs in two ways. First, and primarily, the strong adverse pressure 
gradient across the shock causes the boundary layer to separate from the surface-this 
creates pressure drag due to flow separation. Second, even if the boundary layer did 
not separate, there is a loss of total pressure across the shock which ultimately would 
cause a net static pressure imbalance in the drag direction-also a pressure drag. The 
net effect of these combined phenomena is the large drag rise near Mach 1 shown in 
Fig. 2.11. 
Although Fig. 2.11 is for an airfoil, the same qualitative effect occurs for complete 
airplanes. For example, Fig. 2.42 shows the transonic drag rise for the Northrop 
T-38 jet trainer. Here, the zero-lift drag coefficient C v.o is plotted versus free-stream 
Mach number; note that C v.o experiences about a factor-of-3 increase in the transonic 
regime. 
No closed-form analytical formulas exist to predict the transonic drag rise. Even 
computational fluid dynamics, which has been applied to the computation of transonic 
flows for more than 25 years, does not always give the right answer, principally due 
to uncertainties in the calculation of the shock-induced separated flow. Jobe (Ref. 
27) states:. "The numerous authors in the field of numerical transonic aerodyanmics 
have reached a consensus: Transonic drag predictions are currently unreliable by any 
method." The burden of transonic drag prediction falls squarely on empirical data 
from wind tunnel tests and flight experiments. However, in spite of the difficulty of 
predicting the transonic drag rise, there are two principal design features that have 
been developed in the last half of the twentieth century which serve to reduce the drag 
rise itself, or to delay its effect: the transonic area rule and the supercritical airfoil. 
Let us briefly examine these features. 
Area Rule We first mentioned the area rule in conjunction with the F-102 delta 
wing fighter shown in Fig. 1.31. The essence of the area rule is sketched in Figs. 2.43 
and 2.44. In Fig. 2.43a, the top view of a non-area-ruled airplane is shown; here, 
the variation of the cross-sectional area with the longitudinal distance is not smooth, 
that is, it has some discontinuities in it, particularly where the cross-sectional area 
of the wing is added to that of the fuselage. Prior to the early 1950s, aircraft de­
signers did not realize that the kinks in the cross-sectional area distribution caused a 
large transonic drag rise. However, in the mid-1950s, principally based on the highly 
intuitive experimental wdrk of Richard Whitcomb, an aerodynamicist at NACA Lan­
gley Aeronautical Laboratory, it became evident that the cross-sectional area dis­
tribution for transonic and supersonic airplanes should be smooth-no kinks. This 
can be achieved in part by decreasing the cross-sectional area of the fuselage in the 
wing region to compensate for the cross-sectional area increase due to the wings. 
Such an area-ruled airplane is sketched in Fig. 2.43b. The area ruling causes the 
fuselage to have a "Coke bottle" shape. The effect of area ruling is to reduce the 
peak transonic drag rise, as sketched in Fig. 2.44. The actual drag data for the F-102 
before and after area ruling are given in Fig. 2.45. The minimum drag coefficient is 
plotted versus the free-stream Mach number for (a) the original; non-area-ruled pro­
totype (solid curve) and (b) the modified, area-ruled airplane (labeled revised in Fig. 
2.45 and given by the dashed line). Note the decrease in peak drag coefficient for the 

===== PDF PAGE 130 =====
0 
C H A P T E R 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
.···( 
__ ) 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 LO 1.2 1.4 
Flight Mach m,mber M~ 
Zero-lift drog coefficient variation with Mach number, cmd three-view, 
fur lh<!11 Northrop T-38 ie! !miner (U.S. Air Force). 
117 

===== PDF PAGE 131 =====
118 
Planview 
A(x) 
PART 1 
B 
(a) 
Preliminary Considerations 
Cross section BB, 
with cross-sectional 
area A =f(x) 
Plan view 
A(x) I 
I 
~ 
\ 
X 
Area distribution ---.._ 
(schematic only) 
X 
(b) 
Figure 2.43 Schematics of (a) a non-area-ruled aircraft and (b) an area-ruled aircraf!. 
0 
Figure 2.44 
LO 
Without 
area rule 
..--,\,.,..---With area 
, rule 
\ 
A schematic of the drag-rise properties of area-ruled and non-area-ruled 
aircraft 

===== PDF PAGE 132 =====
C H A P T E R 2 e Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Polar 
0.04 
I 
0.03 
z ,: 0.02 Uc:, 
0.01 
0 
Figure 2.45 
Total 
G\"rn<o<ypc 
///;-~~,)\ -
==:.='-"''"""' _____ .,...fl Improved /~ 
nose \ 
\ 
~--~J 
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 LO l.l 1.2 
Mach number M 
Minimum drag coefficient as a function of Mach number for the F- 102; comparison 
of cases with and without area rule. (After Loftin, Ref. 13.) 
area-ruled airplane. To the bottom right of Fig. 2.45, the cross-sectional area distribu­
tions of the two aircraft are shown; note the smoother, more regular variation for the 
area-ruled aircraft (the dashed curve). For the sake of reference, the area buildup of 
the original, non-area-ruled prototype is shown at the upper left of Fig. 2.45, illustrat­
ing the area contributions from various parts of the aircraft. For additional reference, 
the cross-sectional area buildup of a gene;ic high-speed, area-ruled transport airplane 
is shown in Fig. 2.46, patterned after Refs. 26 and 28. 
Supercritical Airfoil Return again to Fig. 2.11. Note that the drag-divergence Mach 
number Moo occurs slightly above the critical Mach number Merit· Conventional 
wisdom after World War II was that Moo could be increased only by increasing 
Merit· Indeed, the NACA laminar-flow airfoil series, particularly the NACA 64-series 
airfoils, were found to have relatively high values of Merit· This is why the NACA 
64-series airfoil sections found wide application on high-speed airplanes for several 
decades after World War H. This was not because of any possibility of laminar flow, 
as was the original intent of the airfoil design, but rather because, after the fact, 
these airfoil shapes were found to have values of Merit higher than those for the other 
standard NACA airfoil families. 
In 1965, Richard Whitcomb (of area-rule fame) developed a high-speed airfoil 
shape using a different rationale than that 
described above. Rather than increasing the 
value of Merit, Whitcomb designed and tested a new family of airfoil shapes intended 
to increase the increment between Moo and Merit· The small increase of free-stream 
119 

===== PDF PAGE 133 =====
120 P A R T l • Preliminary Considerations 
Figure 2.46 
Vehicle .station 
Cross-sectional area distribution breakdown for a 
lypical, generic high-speed subsonic transport (After 
Goodmanson and Gratzer, Ref. 28.) 
Mach number above Merit but before drag divergence occurs is like a "grace period"; 
Whitcomb worked to increase the magnitude of this grace period. This led· to the 
design of the supercritical airfoil as discussed below. 
The intent of supercritical airfoils is to increase the value of Moo, not necessarily 
Merit· This is achieved as follows; The supercritical airfoil has a relatively flat top, 

===== PDF PAGE 134 =====
c H A P T E R 2 ® Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
thus encouraging a region of supersonic flow with lower local values of M than those 
of the NACA 64 series. In tum, the terminating shock is weaker, thus creating less 
drag. The 
shape of a supercritical airfoil is compared with an NACA 64-series airfoil 
in Fig. 2.47. Also shown are the variations of the pressure coefficient C p, for both 
airfoils. Figure 2.47a and b pertains to the NACA 64-series airfoil at Mach 0.69, and 
Fig. 2.47c and dis for the supercritical airfoil at Mach 0.79. In spite of the fact that 
the 
64-series airfoil is at a lower M 00 , the extent of the supersonic flow reaches farther 
above the airfoil, the local supersonic Mach numbers are higher, and the terminating 
shock wave is stronger. Clearly, the supercritical airfoil shows more desirable flow 
field characteristics; namely, the extent of the supersonic flow is closer to the surface, 
the local supersonic Mach numbers are lower [as evidenced by smaller (in magnitude) 
negative values of C p], and the terminating shock wave is weaker. As a result, the 
value of M00 is higher for the supercritical airfoil. This is verified by the experimental 
data given in Fig. 2.48, taken from Ref. 29. Here, the value of Moo is 0.79 for the 
supercritical airfoil in comparison with 0.67 for the NACA 64 series. 
(-) 
(+) 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(a) 
Relatively 
strong 
shock 
----- --- C p,cr 
..,,,---...... / .... 
(b) NACA 64r A2 ! 5 airfoil 
M==0.69 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
/ 
' ' ' \ 
\ 
I M>I I 
Relatively 
weak 
shock I 
1--~~~~-..1.:"='=::c:--~~ 
(-) 
(+) 
\ 
\ IM> l 
I 
I 
I 
',._! 
(c) 
.... -, 
/ .. _,... ___ .,,.., ___ _ 
I °' 
I ', 
(d) Supercritical airfoil (13.5% thick) 
M==0.79 
Figure 2.47 Standard NACA 64-series airfoil compared with a supercritical airfoil al 
cruise lift conditions. 

===== PDF PAGE 135 =====
122 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
0.16 
0.12 
0.008 
0.004 
Figure 2.48 
0.60 0.64 0.68 
M~ 
Supercritical airfoil 
(13.5% thick) 
0.72 0.76 0.80 
The drag-divergence properties of a standard NACA 64-series airfoil 
and a supercritical airfoil. 
Because the top of the supercriticalairfoil is relatively flat, the forward 60% 
of the airfoil has negative camber, which lowers the lift. To compensate, the lift is 
increased by having extreme positive camber on the rearward 30% of the airfoil. This 
is the reason for the cusplike shape of the bottom surface near the trailing edge. 
A detailed description of the rationale as well as some early experimental data 
for supercritical airfoils is given by Whitcomb in Ref. 29, which should be consulted 
for more details. 
Supersonic Drag Shock waves are the dominant feature of the flow field around an 
airplane flying at supersonic speeds. The presence of shock waves creates a pressure 
pattern around the supersonic airplane which leads to a strong pressure imbalance in 
the drag direction, and which integrated over the surface gives rise to wave drag. 
Supersonic wave drag is a pressure drag. This is best seen in the supersonic flow 
over a flat plate at angle of attack, as shown in Fig. 2.49. The shock and expansion 
wave pattern creates a constant pressure on the bottom surface of the plate that is 
larger than the free-stream pressure Pao, and a constant pressure over the top surface 
of the plate that is smaller than p00 • This pressure distribution creates a resultant 
aerodynamic force perpendicular to the plate, which is resolved into lift and drag, as 
shown in Fig. 2.49. The drag is called wave drag Dw, because it is a ramification of 
the supersonic wave pattern on the body. For small angles of attack, the lift slope is 
expressed by Eq. (2.17), discussed earlier, which gives for the lift coefficient 
4a 
C[. = -;:::::::::;:== 
JM;;, -1 
[2.32] 
The corresponding expression for the wave drag coefficient cd,w is 

===== PDF PAGE 136 =====
c H A I' T E R 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Expansion 
M,,,,>1 
wave 
M,,.> 1 
~~ 2.19 " Th. lb,,., fi~ and prassura dislribulion for o Aat 
p!ale m angle of attack in a supersooic Row. 
4a2 
C - -;::=;;::== 
a,w - JM~ -1 [2.33] 
Since both lift and wave drag occur at angle of attack for the flat plate, an.d both are 
zero at a = 0, the wave drag expressed by Eq. (2.33) i.s wave drag due to lift. This 
is in contrast ffl"a boa.S With. thickness, such as t.11.e supersonic wedge at zero angle of 
attack, shown in Fig. 2.50. The pressure increase across th.e shock leads to a constant 
pressure along the two inclined faces that is greater than p00 • The pressure decrease 
across the expansion waves at th.e comers of the base leads to a base pressure that 
is generally less than p00 • Examining the pressure distribution over the wedge, as 
sh.own in Fig. 2.50, we dearly see that a net drag is produced. This is again called 
wave drag. But we also see from the surface pressure distribution in Fig. 2.50 that 
the lift wm be zero. Hence, Dw in Fig. 2.50 is an example of zero-lift wave drag. 
The above examples are just for the purpose of introducing the concept of super­
sonic wave drag, and to indicate that it consists of two parts: 
(Wave drag) = (zero-lift wave drag) + (wave drag due to lift) 
There exist various computer programs, based on small-perturbation linearized su­
personic theory, for the calculation of supersonic wave drag. In fact, Jobe (Ref. 27) 
states: 
Linear supersonic aerodyna:mfo methods are the mainstay of the aircraft industrJ and 
a.re routinely used for preliminary design because of their simplicity Md versatility 
despite their limitations to slender configurations at low lift coefficients. Not sur­
pri~1ingly most successful 1mpersonic designs to date have adhered to the theoretical 
and geometrical limitations of these analysis methods. 
123 

===== PDF PAGE 137 =====
P A R T l e Preliminary Considerations 
figure 2 • .50 The Aow field and pressure distribution for 
a wedge at 0° angle of attack in a 
supersonic flow. 
At subsonic and transonic speeds, we ignored the effect of Mach number on the 
friction drag coefficient. However, at supersonic speeds, the effects of compressibility 
and heat transfer should be taken into account. Such matters are the subject of classical 
compressible boundary layer theory (e.g., see chapter 6 of Ref. 30). Here we will 
simply present some results for flat-plate skin-friction coefficients that can be used 
for preliminary design estimates. Figure 2.51, obtained from Ref. 30, gives the 
variation of the laminar skin-friction coefficient as a function of Mach number and 
wall-free-stream temperature ratio Tw/T •. The Mach number variation accounts for 
compressibility effects, and the variation with Tw/Te accounts for heat transfer at 
the surface; Figure 2.52, also obtained from Ref. 30, gives the variation of turbulent 
skin friction for an adiabatic wall as a function of Mach number. In Fig. 2.52, 
cf is the compressible turbulent flat-plate skin-friction coefficients, and c 1.0 , is the 
incompressibile value, obtained from Eq. (2.28) or (2.29). 
2.8.4 Summary 
In this section on the buildup of lift and drag, we have dissected the aerodynamics 
of the airplane from the point of view of the properties of various components of the 
airplane, as weH as the effects of different speed regimes-subsonic, transonic, and 
supersonic. In the process, we have presented 
1. Some physical explanations to help you better understand the nature of lift and 
drag, and to sort out the myriad definitions associated with our human efforts to 
understand this nature 

===== PDF PAGE 138 =====
CHAPTER 2 <I' Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
0.5 
"' """' ......... ........ ......... ......... -... ... _ -..... ..... _ --..... Insulated plate -1- - - _ 
-­.... _ --
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 '--~~-'--~~-'-~~-'-~~--'-~~-'-~~--'~~~'--~~-'--~~-'-~~~ 
0 
figure 2.51 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
2 4 6 8 10 
M~ 
12 14 16 
Flat-plate laminar skin-friction drag coefficient as a function of Mach number. 
Computations by Rubesin et al. 
A 0-Equation, Cebeci-Smith 
Cl 2-Equation, Wilcox-Rubesin 
(> RSE (mass-av), Wilcox-Rubesin 
0 RSE (time-av), Donaldson 
2 3 
Iv!~ 
4 5 
Flat-plate lurbuleni skin-friction drag coefficient as a function 
of Mach number: adiabatic wall, Rel = 1 
6 
18 20 

===== PDF PAGE 139 =====
126 P t,. R T 1 • Preliininary Considerations 
2. Some equations, graphs, and approaches for the estimation of lift and drag for 
various components of the airplane, and how they fit together 
We now move on to the concept of overalf airplane lift and drag, and how it is 
packaged for our future discussions on airplane performance and design. 
2.9 THE DRAG POLAR 
In this section we treat the aerodynamics of the complete airplane, and we focus on a 
way in which the aerodynamics can be wrapped in a single, complete package-the 
drag polar. Indeed, the drag polar is the culmination of our discussion of aerodynamics 
in this chapter. Basically, all the aerodynamics of the airplane is contained in the drag 
polar. What is the drag polar? How can we obtain it? Why is it so important? These 
questions are addressed in this section. 
2. 9. 1 More Thoughts on Drag 
As a precursor to this discussion, and because drag is such a dominant consideration 
in airplane aerodynamics, it is interesting to compare the relative percentages for the 
various components of drag for typical subsonic and supersonic airplanes. This is 
seen in the bar charts in Fig. 2.53; the data are from Jobe (Ref. 27). These bar charts 
illustrate relative percentages; they do not give the actual magnitudes. A generic 
subsonic jet transport is treated in Fig. 2.53a; both cruise at Mach 0.8 and takeoff 
Wing 
Body 
Empennage 
Engine instn 
Interference 
leaks etc. 
Cruise 
M,.=0.8 
Basic aircraft 
Undercarriage 
Flaps 
Takeoff 
Wing/body 
. in1rlud,ing engmemstn etc. 
Fin 
Cruise 
M.=2.2 
Takeoff 
(a) Subsonic transport (b) Supenonic transport 
Figure 2.53 Comparison of cruise and 1akeoff drag breakdowns for (a) a generic subsonic 
transport and (bl a generic supersonic transport. 

===== PDF PAGE 140 =====
C H A P T E R 2 e Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
conditions are shown. Similarly, a generic slender, delta-wing, supersonic transport 
is treated in Fig. 2.53b; both cruise at Mach 2.2 and takeoff conditions are shown. 
Note the following aspects, shown in Fig. 2.53: 
1. For the subsonic transport in Fig. 2.53a, the elements labeled wing, body, 
empennage, engine installations, interference, leaks, undercarriage, and flaps are the 
contributors to the zero-lift parasite drag; that is, 
they stem from friction drag and 
pressure drag (due to flow separation). The element labeled lift-dependent drag 
(drag due to lift) stems from the increment of parasite drag associated with the 
change 
in angle of attack from the zero-lift valve, and the induced drag. Note that 
most of the drag at cruise is parasite drag, whereas most of the drag at takeoff is 
lift-dependent drag, which in this case is mostly induced drag associated with the 
high 
lift coefficient at takeoff. 
2. For the supersonic transport in Fig. 2.53b, more than two-thirds of the cruise 
drag is wave drag-a combination of zero-lift wave drag and the lift-dependent drag 
(which is mainly wave drag due to lift). This dominance of wave drag is the major 
aerodynamic characteristic of supersonic airplanes. At takeoff, the drag of the 
supersonic transport is much like that of the subsonic transport, except that the 
supersonic transport experiences more lift-dependent drag. This is because the 
low-aspect-ratio delta wing increases the induced drag, and the higher angle of 
attack required for the delta wing at takeoff (because of the lower lift slope) 
increases the increment in parasite drag due to lift 
Elaborating on the breakdown of subsonic cruise drag shown in Fig. 2.53a, we 
note that, of the total parasite drag at cruise, about two-thirds is usually due to skin 
friction, and the rest is form drag and interference drag. Since friction drag is a 
function of the total wet.red surface area of the airplane (as noted in Section 2.4), 
an estimate of the parasite drag of the whole airplane should involve the wetted 
surface area. The wetted surface area Swet cari be anywhere between 2 and 8 times 
the reference planform area of the wing S. At the conceptual design stage of an 
airplane, the wetted surface area can be estimated based on historical data from 
previous airplanes. · For example, Fig. 2.54 gives the ratio Swed S for a number of 
different types of aircraft, ranging from a flying wing (the B-2) to a large jumbo jet 
(the Boeing 747). Although not very precise, Fig. 2.54 can be used in the conceptual 
design stage to estimate Swet for the given S and aircraft type. In tum, the zero-lift 
parasite drag Do can be expressed in terms of an equivalent skin friction coefficient 
Cfe and Swet as follows: 
[2.35] 
In Eq. (2.35), Cre is a function of Reynolds number based on mean chord length, as 
given in Fig, 2.55, after Jobe (Ref. 27). The equivalent skin-friction coefficient in­
cludes form drag and interference drag as well as friction drag. The more conventional 
zero-lift drag coefficient C v.o is defined in terms of the planform area S 
Do Co,o = -­qooS !2,36] 

===== PDF PAGE 141 =====
Example 2. 15 
P A R T 1 @ Preliminary Considerations 
81 
B-47 
Boeing 
6
1/ n 
747 ,..---~-'-------;;;:,--~-<--1 
Cessna 
sky lane 
Jt ~~ + f-HJ6 
0 40 80 iOO !40 180 
Figure 2.54 
Wing loading WIS (lb/ft2) 
Ratio of wetted surface area lo reference area for a number of different 
airplane configurations. 
Substituting Eq. (2.35) into (2.36), we have 
C _ qooSwetCfe = Swet Cfe 
D,O - q00 S S [2.37] 
Equation (2.37) can be used to obtain an estimate for C D,O by finding Swed S from 
Fig. 2.54 and Cfe from Fig. 2.55. 
Estimate the zero-lift drag coefficient of the Boeing 747. 
Solution 
From Fig. 2.54, for the Boeing 747 
Swetf S = 6.3 
From Fig. 2.55, given the assumption that the Boeing 747 and the Lockheed C-5 are comparable 
airplanes in size and flight conditions, 
cfe = 0.0021 
Hence, from Eq. (2.37), 
Swet ~ CD,0 = 5 Cre = (6.3)(0.0027) = ~ 

===== PDF PAGE 142 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
0.0050 
~ 
u 0.0040 
E 
" ·c:; 
!S g 
C) 
0.0030 C 
0 ·.: 
-~ ';l; 
:.;;J 
r;:, 0.0020 
0.0010 
0 
Figure 2.55 
e .F-4E/J 
', 
',, F-86H 
',, • A-7A 
F-84G •',,• • F-105D 
e e ........ • C-141 !CO 
F-lOOD ............ / 1.5xC1. 
F-84F F-8D '""',,, 
cfico 
(Karman-Schoenherr) 
....... 
C-SA • ............... 
108 
--
Reynolds number (based on mean length) 
Equilvalent skin-friction drag for a variety of airplanes. 
(After Jobe, Ref. 27.) 
... _ --
2.9.2 The Drag Polar: What Is It and How Is It Used? 
----
For every aerodyamic body, there is a relation between CD and CL that can be ex -
pressed as an equation or plotted on a graph. Both the equation and the graph are 
called the drag polar. Virtually all the aerodynamic information about an airplane 
necessary for a performance analysis is wrapped up in the drag polar. We examine this 
matter further and construct a suitable expression for the drag polar for an airplane. 
From Section 2.8.3 on drag, we can write the total drag for an airplane as the 
following sum: 
(Total drag) = (parasite drag) + ( wave drag) + (induced drag) 
In coefficient form, Eq. (2.38) becomes 
c2 
Cv = Cv,e + Cv,w + .7l'elR 
[2.38] 
[2.39] 
The parasite drag-coefficient Cv,e can be treated as the sum of its value at zero lift 
Cv,e,o and the increment in parasite drag !lCv,e due to lift. Another way to look 
at the source of !lCv,e is to realize that lift is a function of angle of attack a and 
that !lC D,e is due to the change in orientation of the airplane, that is, the change in 
129 

===== PDF PAGE 143 =====
130 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
a required to produce the necessary lift. That is, the skin-friction drag (to a lesser 
extent) and the pressure drag due to flow separation (to a greater extent) change 
when a changes; the sum of these changes creates 11Co,e-Moreover, if we return to 
Fig. 2.6b, which is plot of cd and c1 for an airfoil, we note that the change in cd, 
denoted !1cd, measured above its minimum value seems to vary approximately as the 
square of c1. The source of cd is friction drag and pressure drag due to flow separation 
(form drag). These physical phenomena are exactly the same source of Co,e- Since 
!1cd varies approximately as cl, we can reasonably assume that /1C O,e varies as Cz. 
Indeed, we assume 
C 0,e = C O,e,O + !1C O,e = C O,e.O + k1 ct [2.40] 
where k1 is a suitable proportionality constant. 
Next, we can dissect the wave drag coefficient C o.w in a similar fashion; that is, 
Co.w is the sum of the zero-lift wave drag coefficient Co,w,o and the change !1Co,w 
due to lift. Recalling our discussion of supersonic drag in Section 2.8.3, we note that, 
for a flat plate at angle of attack, the substitution of Eq. (2.32) into (2.33) yields 
cd _ 4a2 = 4 (ciJM;;,-1)
2 
.w- JM;;,-1 JM;;,-1 4 
[2.41] 
clJM;;, - 1 
4 
Since cd,w is simply the wave drag coefficient due to lift, and since Eq. (2.41) shows 
that cd,w varies as cl, we are comfortable with the assumption that 11Co.w varies as 
Cz. Hence, 
Co,w = Co.w,O + 11Co.w = Co,w,o + k2Cz 
where k2 is an appropriate proportionality constant. 
Substituting Eqs. (2.40) and (2.42) into Eq. (2.39), we have 
2 2 . cf Co= Co,e,O + Co.w,O + k1CL + k2CL + :ireAR 
In Eq. (2.43), define k3 = 1/(:ireAR). Then Eq. (2.43) becomes 
Co= Co,e,o + Co,w,o + (k1 + k2 + k3)Cz 
The sum of the first two terms is simply the zero-lift drag coefficient Co,o 
Co,e,o + Co,w,o = Co,o 
Also, let 
[2.42] 
[2.43] 
[2.44] 
[2.45] 
[2.46] 
Substituting Eqs. (2.45) and (2.46) into Eq. (2.44), we have for the complete airplane 
Co= CD,o + KCz [2.47] 

===== PDF PAGE 144 =====
C H A P T E R 2 o Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
Equation (2.47) is the drag polar for the airplane. In Eq. (2.47), CD is the total 
drag coefficient, C D,o is the zero-lift parasite drag coefficient (usually called just the 
zero-lift drag coefficient), and K Ci is the drag due to lift. The form of Eq. (2.47) is 
valid for both subsonic and supersonic flight. At supersonic speeds, C D,o contains 
the wave drag at zero lift, along 
with the friction and form drags, and the effect of 
wave drag due to lift is contained in the value used for K. 
A graph of CL versus CD is sketched in Fig. 2.56. This is simply a plot of Eq. 
(2.47), hence the curve itself is also called the drag polar. The label drag polar for 
this type of plot was coined by the Frenchman Gustave Eiffel in 1909 (see Section 
2.10). The origin of this label is easily seen in the sketch shown in Fig. 2.57. Consider 
an airplane at an angle of attack a, as shown in Fig. 2.57a. The resultant aerodynamic 
force R makes an angle e with respect to the relative wind. If R and e are drawn on a 
piece of graph paper, they act as polar coordinates which locate point a in Fig. 2.57b. 
If a is changed in Fig. 2.51a, then new values of R and e are produced; these new 
values locate a second point, say point b, in Fig. 2.57b. The locus of all such points 
for all values of ot forms the drag polar in Fig. 2.57b. Thus, the drag polar is nothing 
more than the resultant aerodynamic force plotted in polar coordinates-hence the 
name drag polar. Note that each point on the drag polar corresponds to a different 
angle of attack for the airplane. Also, note that a plot of L versus.D, as shown in Fig. 
2.57b, yields the same curve as a plot of Ci versus CD, as shown in Fig. 2.56. In 
most cases, the drag polar is plotted in terms of the aerodynamic coefficients rather 
than the aerodynamic forces. 
Another feature of the drag polar diagram, very closely related to that shown 
in Fig. 2.57b, is sketched in Fig. 2.58. Consider a straight line (the dashed line) 
drawn from the origin to point 1 on the drag polar. The length and angle of this line 
Figure 2.56 
Drag polar 
Cn"' + 
Schematic of !he components of the 
drag polar. 
131 

===== PDF PAGE 145 =====
132 
Figure 2.57 
P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
L 
(a) 
Construction for the resultant aerodynamic force on a drag polar. 
(b) 
Note: Different points 
on the drag polar 
correspond to different 
angles of attack. 
D 
correspond to the resultant force coefficient CR and its orientation relative to the free­
stream direction (}, as discussed above. Also, point 1 on the drag polar corresponds 
to a ce1tain angle of attac~ a 1 of the airplane. The slope of the line 0-1 is equal to 
CL/CD, that is, lift-to-drag ratio. Now imagine that we ride up the polar curve shown 
in Fig. 2.58. The slope of the straight line from the origin will first increase, reach 
a maximum at point 2, and then decrease such as shown by line 0-3. Examining 
Fig. 2.58, we see that the line 0-2 is tangent to the drag polar. Conclusion: The 
tangent line to the drag pqlar drawn from the origin locates the point of maximum 
lift-to-drag ratio for the airplane. Moreover; the angle of attack associated with the 
tangent point a2 corresponds to that angle of attack for the airplane when it is flying 
at (L/ D)max· Sometimes this tangent point (point 2 in Fig. 2.58) is called the design 
point for the airplane, and the corresponding value ofCL is sometimes called the 
design lift coefficient for the airplane. Also note from Fig. 2.58 that the maximum 
lift-to-drag ratio clearly does not correspond to the.point of minimum drag. 
There has been a subtlety in our discussion of the drag polar. In all our previous 
sketches and equations for the drag polar, we have tacitly assumed that the zero-lift 
drag is also the minimum drag. This is reflected in the vertex of each parabolically 
shaped drag polar in Figs. 2.56 to 2.58 being on the horizontal axis for CL = 0. 
However, for real airplanes, this is usually not the case. When the airplane is pitched 
to its zero-lift angle-of-attack aL=O, the parasite drag may be slightly higher than 
the minimum value, which would occur at some small angle of attack slightly above 
aL=O· This situation is sketched in Fig. 2.59. Here, the drag polar in Fig. 2.56 has 
simply been translated vertically a small distance; the shape, however, stays the same. 
The equation for the drag polar in Fig. 2.59 is obtained directly from Eq. (2.47) by 
translating the value of CL; that is, in Eq. (2.47), replace CL with CL - CLmindrng' 
Hence, for the type of drag polar sketched in Fig. 2.59, the analytical equation is 
[2.48] 

===== PDF PAGE 146 =====
C H A P T E R 2 !Ill Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
/ 
/ 
Point for // 
(L/DJmax \ //// 
2/ 
0 
figure 2.58 
(CL)min drag - C 
D,min 
o Cv,o 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Construction for maximum lift-lo-drag 
point on a drag polar. 
Figure 2.59 lllustraiion of minimum drag and drag at zero lift. 
For airplanes with wings of moderate camber, the difference between C n.o and C Dm;n 
is very small and can be ignored. We make this assumption in this book, and hence 
we treat Eq. (2.47) as our analytical equation for the drag polar in the subsequent 
chapters. 
For purposes of instruction, let us examine the drag polars for several real air­
planes. The low-speed (M00 < 0.4) drag polar for the Lockheed C-141 military jet 
133 

===== PDF PAGE 147 =====
134 P A R T l • Preliminary Considerations 
Figure 2.60 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
CL 
0.4 
0.2 
0 4 
• • • • 
ct'o~J .0---~---· 
CDMIN 
8 12 
LID 
16 
0.12 
20 24 
low-speed drag polar and L/ D variation For the Lockheed 
C-141 A (shown in three-view). 
transport is given in Fig. 2.60, and the drag polar at M00 = 0.8 for the McDonnell 
F4C jet fighter is given in Fig. 2.61. It is worthwhile studying these drag polars, just 
to obtain a feeling for the numbers for CL and CD. Also, note that each of the drag 
polars in Figs. 2.60 and 2.61 is for a given Mach number ( or Mach number range). It 
is important to remember that CL and CD are functions of the Mach number; hence 
the same airplane will have different drag polars for different Mach numbers. At low 
subsonic Mach numbers, the differences will be small and can be ignored. However, 
at high subsonic Mach numbers, especially above the critical Mach number, and for 
supersonic Mach numbers, the differences will be large. This trend is illustrated in 

===== PDF PAGE 148 =====
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
Figure 2.61 
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20 0.24 0.28 
Drag polar at Mach 0.8 for the McDannell-Dauglas F.4 Phantom 
(shown in three-view). 
Fig. 2.62, which gives the drag polars for the McDonnell-Douglas F-15 jet fighter 
at 30,000-ft altitude for a range of free-stream Mach numbers. Subsonic and tran­
sonic drag polars are shown in Fig. 2.62a. Note the large increases in the minimum 
drag coefficient as the Mach number is increased through the transonic regime, and 
how this translates the entire drag polar to the right. This increase in Cv,min is to 
be expected; it is due to the drag-divergence effects illustrated, for example, in Fig. 
2.11. Supersonic drag polars are shown in Fig. 2.62b. Here, we note a progressive 
decrease in C D,min as M00 is increased, consistent with the supersonic trend illustrated 
in Fig. 2.11. Also note that the magnitude of CL decreases as M 00 is increased, con­
sistent with the supersonic trend illustrated in Fig. 2.10. Hence, in Fig. 2.62b, as M00 
135 

===== PDF PAGE 149 =====
136 PART 1 Preliminary Considerations 
0.4 
0.2 
..l.L __ ./\ 
0 0 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 
(M= = 0.2) (M= = 0.8) (M= > 0.9) 
CD 
(a) Subsonic and Transonic 
CL 
I 0.61-
0.41/ 
0.2 
I 
0.04 0.06 0.04 0.06 
(M= = l.4) (M= = 2.2) 
CD 
(b) Supersonic 
0.08 O.iO 
Figure 2.62 Drag polars at different Mach numbers for the McDonnell-Douglas F-15 (shown in three-view). (a) Subsonic 
and transonic speeds. (b) Supersonic speeds. Please note in parts (a) and that the origin for Co is different 
for different Mach numbers, as indicated by the broken abscissa. 
increases, the supersonic drag polar shifts toward the left and gets "squashed down" 
closer to the horizontal axis. 
DESIGN CAMEO 
An accurate drag polar is essential to good airplane 
design. At the beginning of the preliminary design 
process (Chapters 7 and 8), every effort (theoret­
ical and experimental) is made to obtain a good 
approximation for the drag polar. As the airplane 
design goes through iteration and refinement, the 
prediction of the drag polar also goes through a similar 
iteration and refinement. With this in mind, let us re­
flect again on the two drag polars sketched in Figs. 
2.56 and 2.59. In Fig. 2.56, the drag polar is for 
an airplane that has the minimum drag coefficient 
at zero lift. This would be the case, for example, 
for an airplane with a symmetric fuselage, a wing 
with a symmetric airfoil, and zero incidence angle 
(continued) 

===== PDF PAGE 150 =====
CHAPTER 2 @ 
between the wing chord and the axis of symmetry of 
the fuselage. Such an airplane would have zero lift at 
0° angle of attack, and the drag would be a minimum at 
the same 0° angle of attack. In contrast, the drag polar 
sketched in Fig. 2.59, where the zero-lift drag coeffi­
cient is not the same as the minimum drag coefficient, 
applies to an airplane with some effective camber; 
the zero-lift drag coefficient C D.o is obtained at some 
angle of attack different from zero. This is the case for 
most such as that shown in Fig. 2.60. 
In the remainder of this book, we assume that the 
difference between C D,O and CD.min is small, and we 
will deal with the type of drag polar shown in Fig. 2.56. 
This has the advantage of leading to relatively straight­
forward analytical formulas for the various airplane 
performance characteristics discussed in Chapters 5 
and 6--analytical formulas which are very useful to 
the designer in the preliminary design process. More­
over, many of the airplane performance characteristics 
are relatively insensitive to whether the form of the drag 
polar is given by Fig. 2.56 or 2.59, within reason. How­
ever, when the stage in the design process is reached 
where design optimization is carried out, it is impor­
tant to deal with a more accurate drag polar as sketched 
in Fig. 2.59. Otherwise, the optimization process may 
converge to a misleading configuration. The reader is 
cautioned about this effect on the design. However, 
all the educational goals of the subsequent chapters are 
more readily achieved by assuming a drag polar of the 
form shown in Fig. 2.56, and hence we continue with 
this assumption. 
10 HISTORICAL NOTE: THE ORIGIN OF THE DRAG 
POLAR-LILIENTHAL AND EIFFEL 
The first drag polar in the history of aerodynamics was constructed by Otto Lilienthal 
in Germany toward the end of the nineteenth century. Lilienthai played a pivotal 
role in the development of aeronautics, as discussed in Chapter 1. Among his many 
contributions was a large bulk of aerodynamic lift and drag measurements on flat 
plates and thin, cambered airfoils, which he published in 1889 and in his classic book 
entitled Birdflight as the Basis of Aviation (Ref. 31 ). Later, these results were tabulated 
by Lilienthal; this became the famous Lilienthal table used by the Wright brothers in 
their early flying machine work. However, of interest in the present section is that in 
Ref. 31 Lilienthal also plotted his. data in the form of drag polars. 
Before we pursue this matter further, let us expand on our earlier discussion of 
Lilienthal in Chapter 1, take a closer look at the man himself. 
Otto Lilienthal was born in Anklam, Germany, on May 23, 1848, to middle­
class parents. His mother was an educated woman, interested in artistic and cultural 
matters, and was a trained singer. His father was a cloth merchant who died when Otto 
was only 13 years old. Lilienthal was educated in Potsdam and Berlin; in 1870, he 
graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering from the Berlin Trade Academy 
(now the respected Technical University of Berlin), A photograph of Lilienthal is 
shown in Fig. 2,63. After serving in the Franco-Prussian War, Lilienthal married 
and went into business for himself. He obtained a patent for a compact, efficient, 
low-cost boiler, and in 1881 he opened a small factory in Berlin to manufacture 
his boilers. This boiler factory became his lifelong source of monetary income. 
However, his adulthood, Lilienthal lived a simultaneous "second life," 
namely, that of an aerodynamic researcher and aeronautical enthusiast. As early 
as 1866, with the help of his brother Gustav, Lilienthal began a series of protracted 
137 

===== PDF PAGE 151 =====
138 P A R T l ® Preliminary Considerations 
figure 2.63 Otto Lilienthal (1848-1896). 
aerodynamic experiments to measure the lift and drag on a variety of different-shaped 
lifting surfaces. In Lilienthal's words, these experiments continued '\vith some long 
interruptions until 1889." Lilienthal's measurements fell into two categories-those 
obtained with a whirling arm device and later those obtained outside in the natural 
wind. In 1889, Lilienthal finally gathered together his data and published them in 
Ref. 31, which has become 
one of the classics of pre-twentieth-century aeronautics. 
For a lengthy description and evaluation of Lilienthal's aerodynamics, see Ref. 8. 
Figure 2.64 is one of many similar charts found in Lilienthal 's book. It is a plot 
of the measured resultant aerodynamic force (magnitude and direction) for a range of 
angle of attack for a flat plate. The arrows from the origin (in the lower left comer) to 
the solid curve are the resultant force vectors; each arrow corresponds to a different 
angle of attack for the flat plate. The vertical and horizontal components of each arrow 
are the lift and drag, respectively. The solid curve is clearly a drag polar. Moreover, 
if we take the drag coefficient for a flat plate oriented perpendicular to the flow to be 
CD= l (approximately true), then the length of the arrow at 90° can be considered 
a unit length, and relative to this unit length, the vertical and horizontal lengths of 
each arrow are equal to CL and C0 , respectively. (See Ref. 8 for a full explanation.) 
In any event, Fig. 2.64 and the dozens of other similar plots for curved airfoils in 
Lilienthal's book represent the first drag polars in the history of aerodynamics. 
Lilienthal's contributions to pre-twentieth-century aerodynamics were seminal. 
However, he is much more widely known for his development of the hang glider, 
and for his more than 2,000 successful glider flights during 1891 to 1896. Lilienthal 
developed the first successful, human-carrying gliders in the history of aeronautics. 
With these, he advanced the progress in aeronautics to a new height; he was the first 
person to find out what it takes to operate a flying machine in the air, even though an 
engine was not involved. Unfortunately, on the morning of August 9, 1896, during a 
flight in one of his gliders, Lilienthal encountered an unexpected thennal eddy which 
stalled his aircraft, and he crashed to the ground from a height of 50 ft. With a 
broken spine, Lilienthal died the next day in a Berlin clinic. As we first discussed in 
Chapter l, at that time he had been working on an engine for his gliders, and there are 
some historians who feel that, had Lilienthal lived, he might have beaten the Wright 
brothers to the punch, and he might have been the first to fly a successful airplane. 
However, it was not to be. 

===== PDF PAGE 152 =====
oo 
a 
C H A P T E R 2 @ Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
50 100 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I / 
I / 
I / / 
I / / 
I / / 
I / / 
I / / 
I / / 
I / / 
I / / 
I / // 
I // / 
/ / / / 
I / / 
I 37°/ 40° 
/ 
/ 
so;/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
,/ 
/ 
65° 
85° 
Resistance of normally hit surfaces 
0°~~-"..::_p,;µ.._..,.L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-'-90° 
from the equation l = 0, 13 · Fv2. 
b 
figure 2.64 One of Lilienthal's drag polars; this one is for a Rat plate. (Ref. 31.) 
Even though Lilienthal was the first to construct a drag polar, he did not iden­
tify the plot as such. The name drag polar was coined about two decades later by 
Gustave Eiffel in Paris. Eiffel was a distinguished civil engineer who specialized in 
metal structures, and who is perhaps best known for the construction of the Eiffel 
Tower in Paris. A photograph of Eiffel is shown in Fig. 2.65. In the later years of his 
life, Eiffel became very active in aerodynamics. Beginning in 1902, he conducted a 
series of experiments by dropping various aerodynamic shapes from the Eiffel Tower 
and measuring their drag. In early 1909, he constructed a wind tunnel within the 
shadow of the tower, where he carried out extensive measurements of aerodynamic 
forces and pressure distributions on various wings and airplane models. The results 
of these tests were published in Ref. 32. Among the many plots in Ref. 32 are drag 
polars, which he referred to as polar diagrams. One such drag polar measured by 
Eiffel was for a model of the wing of the Wright Flyer; this drag polar is shown in Fig. 
2.66 as the solid curve. Figure 2.66 is reproduced directly from Eiffel's book (Ref. 32). 
139 

===== PDF PAGE 153 =====
140 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Figure 2.65 Gustave Eiffel (1832-1923). 
007 
006 
:.t 
C: 
0 
005 "fl .. " ... co u 
"€ 
004 " > 
·a 
::i 
003 
002 
..___ __ _.__ __ __,_ __ __, 0 00 
003 
Figure2.66 
002 001 000 
Unit horizontal reaction Kx 
A drag polar for a wind tunnel model of the 
wing of the Wright Flyer, measured and 
published by Eiffel in 1910. (Ref. 32.) 

===== PDF PAGE 154 =====
C H A. P T E R 2 19 Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
From that time on to the present, all such diagrams have been called drag polars in 
the aerodynamic literature. 
Eiffel contributed much more to the discipline of aerodynamics than that dis­
cussed above. For example, he designed a style of subsonic wind tunnel called the 
Eiffel-type Eiffel-type tunnels are still widely used all across the world. He 
designed and tested airfoils; many of the French-built World War I airplanes used 
Eiffel airfoils. Eiffel continued anintensive program of aerodynamic research and 
development throughout the war and until his death in 1923 at the age of 91. For 
unexplained reasons, the fact that the builder of the Eiffel Tower was also the leading 
aerodynamicist in France during the period from 1902 to 1923 has become almost for­
gotten by modem aerodynamicists. Yet this intellectually powerful man contributed 
greatly to the historical development of aerodynamics after the turn of the century, 
and his legacy lives on in the way we do business in modem aerodynamics, especially 
in regard to experimental aerodynamics. For an extensive discussion of Eiffel and his 
contributions to aerodynamics, see Ref. 8. 
2.11 SUMMARY 
This has been a chapter on applied aerodynamics-aerodynamic concepts, formu-
and data to be applied to our discussions of airplane performance and design 
in subsequent chapters. Even though we have limited ourselves to applications of 
aerodynamics, we still have covered a wide range of topics. We have concentrated 
on the following aspects: 
1. The sources of any aerodynamic force and moment on a body are the surface 
pressure distribution and the surface skin-friction distribution, integrated over 
the complete exposed surface of the body. Pressure distribution and skin­
friction distribution-these are the two hands nature uses to reach out and grab 
a moving body immersed in a fluid. 
2. Dimensionless coefficients are used to quantify these forces and moments. For 
a given shaped body, the lift, drag, and moment coefficients are functions of the 
angle of attack, Mach number, and Reynolds number. The question as to how 
CL, CD, and CM vary with a, M 00 , and Re was examined. 
3. There exists an aerodynamic center on a body, that is, that point about which 
moments may be finite, but do not vary with angle of attack. We set up a short 
procedure for calculating the location of the aerodynamic center. 
4. There is an existing body of airfoil nomenclature. We looked at it and 
explained it. 
5. Lift and drag on an airplane can be viewed as built up from those on various 
parts of the airplane-wing, fuselage, etc. However, the total lift and drag are 
not equal to the sum of the parts, due to aerodynamic interference effects. 
6. Wing aerodynamics is a function of the wing shape. High-aspect-ratio straight 
wing, high-aspect-ratio swept wing, low-aspect-ratio wing, and a 
delta wing 
were the typical planform shapes considered here. 

===== PDF PAGE 155 =====
P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
7. The drag polar, a plot of CL versus CO ( or vice versa), contains almost all the 
necessary aerodynamics for an airplane performance analysis, and hence for a 
preliminary design of an airplane. 
Look over the above list again. If the important details associated with each item 
do not readily come to mind, return to the pertinent section and refresh your memory. 
It is important that you have a comfortable feel for the applied aerodynamics discussed 
here. When you are ready, proceed to the next chapter, where we will examine some of 
the applied aspects of propulsion necessary for our subsequent airplane performance 
and design analyses. 
PROBLEMS 
2.1 We wish to design a wind tunnel test to accurately measure the lift and drag coefficients 
that pertain to the Boeing 777 in actual flight at Mach 0.84 at an altitude of 35,000 ft. 
The wingspan of the Boeing 777 is 199.9 ft. However, to fit in the wind tunnel test 
section, the wingspan of the wind tunnel model of the Boeing 777 is 6 ft. The pressure 
of the airstream in the test section of the wind tunnel is 1 atm. Calculate the necessary 
values of the airstream velocity, temperature, and density in the test section. Assume 
that the viscosity coefficient varies as the square root of the temperature. Note: The 
answer to this problem leads to an absurdity. Discuss the nature of this absurdity in 
relation to the real world of wind tunnel testing. 
2.2 Consider an NACA 2412 airfoil ( data given in Fig. 2.6) with chord of 1.5 mat an angle 
of attack of 4°. For a free-stream velocity of 30 mis at standard sea-level conditions, 
calculate the lift and drag per unit span. Note: The viscosity coefficient at standard 
sea-level conditions is 1.7894 x 10- 5kg/(m·s). 
2.3 For the airfoil and conditions in Problem 2.2, calculate the lift-to-drag ratio. Comment 
on its magnitude. 
2.4 For the NACA 2412 airfoil, the data in Fig. 2.6a show that, at a: = 6°, c1 = 0.85 
and Cm, 14 = -0.037. Jn Example 2.4, the location of the aerodynamic center is 
calculated as Xa.c./ c = -0.0053, where Xa.c. is measured relative to the quarter-chord 
point. From this information, calculate the value of the moment coefficient about the 
aerodynamic center, and check your result with the measured data in Fig. 2.6b. 
2.5 Consider a finite wing of aspect ratio 4 with an NACA 2412 airfoil; the angle of attack 
is 5°. Calculate (a) the lift coefficeint at low speeds (incompressible flow) using the 
results of Prandtl's lifting line theory, and (b) the lift coefficient for M00 = 0.7. 
Assume that the span efficiency factor for lift is e1 = 0.90. 
2.6 Using Helmbold's relation for low-aspect-ratio wings, calculate the lift coefficient of 
a finite wing of aspect ratio 1.5 with an NACA 2412 airfoil section. The wing is at 
an angle of attack of 5°. Compare this result with that obtained from Prandtl 's lifting 

===== PDF PAGE 156 =====
C H A P T E R 2 • Aerodynamics of the Airplane: The Drag Polar 
line theory for high-aspect-ratio wings. Comment on the different between the two 
results. Assume a span efficiency factor e1 = 1.0. 
Consider the wing described in Problem 2.5, except now consider the wing to be 2.7 
swept at 35°. Calculate the lift coefficient at an angle of attack of 5° for M 00 = 0.7. 
Comparing this with the result of Problem 2.5b, comment on the effect of wing sweep 
on the lift coefficient. 
Consider a wing with a thin, symmetric airfoil section in a Mach 2 airflow at an angle 2.8 
of attack of 1.5°. Calculate the lift cofficient 
(a) For the airfoil section. 
(b) For the wing if it is a straight wing with an aspect ratio of 2.56. 
( c) For the wing if it is swept at an angle of 60°, with an aspect ratio of 2.56 and a taper 
ratio of unity. [Note: These are approximately the characteristics of the wing for the 
BAC (English Electric) Lightning supersonic fighter designed and built in England 
during the 1960s.] 
The Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport has an ogival delta wing with as 2.9 
aspect ratio of 1.7. Assuming a triangular planform shape, estimate the low-speed 
lift coefficient for this wing at an angle of attack of 25°. 
Consider inviscid supersonic flow over a two-dimensional flat plate. 2. 10 
(a) What is the value of the maximum lift-to-drag ratio? 
(b) At what angle of attack does it occur? 
Consider viscous supersonic flow over a two-dimensional flat plate. 2.11 
(a) Derive an expression for the maximum lift-to-drag ratio. 
(b) At what angle of attack does it occur? 
In parts (a) and (b), couch your results in terms of the skin-friction drag coefficient, 
Cd.J and free-stream Mach number. Assume, that Cd.f is independent of the angle of 
attack. 
Estimate the zero-lift drag coefficient of the General Dynamics F-102. 2.12 
143 

===== PDF PAGE 157 =====
chapl'er 
3 
Some Propulsion Characteristics 
The chief obstacle (to successful powered flight) has hitherto been the lack of a 
sufficiently light motor in proportion to its energy; but there has recently been such 
marked advance in this respect, that a partial success with screws is even now almost 
in sight. 
Octave Chanute, U.S. aeronautical pioneer; 
from his Progress in Flying Machines, 1894 
Since the beginning of powered flight, the evolutions of both the aero-vehicle and 
aeropropulsion systems are strongly interrelated, and are governed by a.few major 
thrusts, namely: demands for improving reliability, endurance and lifetime; improve­
ments in flight performance, such as speed, range, altitude maneuverability; and in 
more recent time, strongest emphasis on overall economy. Under. these thrusts the 
technologies of aero-vehicle and propulsion system advanced continuously. 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Hans von Ohain, German inventor 
of the jet engine; comments made 
in 1979 during a reflection of 
the fortieth anniversary of the first 
flight of a jet-propelled airplane 
Thrust and the way it is produced are the subjects of this chapter. In keeping with 
the spirit of Chapter 2 on aerodynamics, this chapter emphasizes only those aspects 
of flight propulsion that are necessary for our subsequent discussions of airplane 
145 

===== PDF PAGE 158 =====
146 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
performance and design. We examine in tum the following types of aircraft propulsion 
mechanisms: 
1. Reciprocating engine/propeller 
2. Turbojet 
3. Turbofan 
4. Turboprop 
In each case, we are primarily concerned with two characteristics: thrust (or power) 
and fuel consumption. These are the two propulsion quantities that directly dictate 
the performance of an airplane. Also, note that missing from the above list is rocket 
engines. The use of rockets as the primary propulsion mechanism for airplanes is very 
specialized; the Bell X-1, the first airplane to fly faster than the speed of sound, and 
the North American X-15, the first airplane to fly at hypersonic speeds, are examples 
of aircraft powered by rocket engines. Rockets are also sometimes used for assisted 
takeoffs; JATO, which is an acronym for jet-assisted takeoff, is a bundle of small 
rockets mounted externally to the airplane, and it was used during and after World 
War II as a means of shortening the takeoff distance for some airplanes. However, 
we will not focus on rocket propulsion as a separate entity in this chapter. 
Why do different aircraft propulsion devices exist? We have listed above four 
different devices, ranging from propellers connected to reciprocating engines or gas 
turbines, to pure turbojet engines. Of course, there is an historical, chronological 
thread. Beginning with Langley's Aerodrome and the Wright Flyer, the first airplanes 
were driven by propellers connected to internal combustion reciprocating engines. 
Then the invention of the jet engine in the late 1930s revolutionized aeronautics and 
allowed the development of transonic and supersonic airplanes. But this historical 
thread is not the answer to the question. For example, many airplanes today are still 
powered by the classical propeller/reciprocating engine combination, a full 50 years 
after the jet revolution. Why? There is a rather general, sweeping answer to these 
questions, having to do with the compromise between thrust and efficiency. This is 
the subject of the next section. 
3.2 THRUST AND EFFICIENCY-THE TRADEOFF 
In an elementary fashion, we can state that a propeller/reciprocating engine com­
bination produces comparably low thrust with great efficiency, a turbojet produces 
considerably higher thrust with less efficiency, and a rocket engine produces tremen­
dous thrust with poor efficiency. In this sense, there is a tradeoff-more thrust means 
less efficiency in this scenario. This tradeoff is the reason why all four propulsion 
mechanisms listed in Section 3.1 are still used today-the choice of a proper power 
plant for an airplane depends on what you want that airplane to do. 
What is the technical reason for this tradeoff-thrust versus efficiency? First, let 
us consider the fundamental manner in which thrust is produced. (For a more detailed 

===== PDF PAGE 159 =====
C H A I' T E R 3 "' Some Prc,pu!sicin Characteristics 
and elaborate discussion and derivation of the Llu'ust equation, see, e.g., chapter 9 
of Ref. 3, or any book on flight propulsion, such as Refs. 33 and 34.) Consider 
Fig. 3. la, which shows a stream tube of air flowing from left to right through a generic 
propulsive device; t.'1is device may be a propeller, a jet engine, etc. The function of 
the propulsive device is to produce thrust T, acting toward the left, as sketched in Fig. 
3.lb. No matter what type of propulsive device is used, the thrust is exerted on the 
device via the net resultant of the pressure and shear stress distributions acting on the 
exposed surface areas, internal and/or external, at each point where the air contacts 
any part of the device. This is consistent with our discussion of aerodynamic force in 
Chapter 2. The pressure and shear stress distributions are the two hands of nature that 
reach out and grab hold of any object immersed in an airflow. These two hands of 
,----1~-r---l -,
1 
-,-v~-- If 11 Ji---v-j--
~~ 
figure 3.1 
I 
(b) Prnpulsive device produces 
thrust T acting to the left. 
Air processed by propulsive 
device 
I T L._ 
I I J vj 
~ 
----·- (c) Air feels equal and opposite 
force T acting to the right 
Reaction in propulsion. 
141 

===== PDF PAGE 160 =====
148 P. A R T l • Preliminary Considerations 
nature grab the propulsive device and exert a force on it, namely, the thrust T, shown 
in Fig. 3.lb. The air exerts thrust on the device. However, from Newton's third law­
namely, that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction-the propulsion 
device will exert on the air an equal and opposite force T, acting towards the right, 
as sketched in Fig. 3.lc. Now imagine that you are the air, and you experience the 
force T acting toward the right. You will accelerate toward the right; if your initial 
velocity is Y 00 far ahead of the propulsion device, you will have a latger velocity 
Yj downstream of the device, as sketched in Fig. 3. lc. We call Yj the jet velocity. 
The change in velocity Yj - Y 00 is related to T through Newton's second law, which 
states that the force on an object is equal to the time rate of change of momentum of 
that object. Here, the "object" is the air flowing through the propulsion device, and 
the force on the air is T, as shown inFig. 3.lc. Momentum is mass times velocity. 
Let rh be the mass ft.ow (for example, kg/s or slug/s) through the stream tube in Fig. 
3. lc. We are assuming steady flow, so rh is the same across any cross section of the 
stream tube. Hence, the momentum per unit time entering the stream tube at the left 
is rh Y 00 , and that leaving the stream tube at the right is rh Yj. Thus, the time rate 
of change of momentum of the air flowing through the propulsion device is simply 
the momentum flowing out at the right minus the momentum flowing in at the left, 
namely, rhYj - rhY00 , or rh(Yj - Y00 ). From Newton's second law, this time rate of 
change of momentum is equal to the force T. That is, 
IT =rh(Yj -Y00 ) I [3.1] 
Equation (3.1) is the thrust equation for our generic propulsion device. (We note 
that a more detailed derivation of the thrust equation takes into account the additional 
force exerted by the pressure acting on the "walls" of the stream tube; for our analysis 
here, we are assuming this effect to be small, and we are ignoring it. For a more 
detailed derivation, see the control volume analysis in chapter 9 of Ref. 3.) 
Let us now consider the matter of efficiency, which has a lot to do with the 
"wasted" kinetic energy left in the exhaust jet. In Fig. 3.1 we have visualized the 
situation when the propulsive device is stationary, and the air is moving through the 
device, with an initial upstream air velocity of Y 00 • Clearly, velocities V 00 and Vj are 
relative to the device. If we are sitting in the laboratory with the stationary device, we 
see the air moving both in front of and behind the device with velocities V 00 and Yj, 
respectively. However, consider the equivalent situation where the propulsive device 
moves with a velocity Y00 into stationary air, as shown in Fig. 3.2. This is the usual 
case in practice; the propulsive device is mounted on an airplane, and the airplane flies 
with velocity Y 00 into still air. Relative to the device, the flow picture is identical to 
that sketched in Fig. 3.1, with an upstream velocity relative to the device equal to Y 00 
and a downstream velocity relative to the device equal to Yj. However, for us sitting 
in the laboratory, we do nor see velocities Y 00 and Yj at all; rather, we see stationary 
air in front of the device, we see the device hurtling by us at a velocity Y00 , and we 
see the air behind the device moving in the opposite direction with a velocity (relative 
to the laboratory) of Yj - V00 , as shown in Fig. 3.2. In essence, before the moving 
device enters the laboratory, the air in the room is stationary, hence it has no kinetic 

===== PDF PAGE 161 =====
C H A P T E R 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 
i Stationary air --+--- .. -~ 
V=O v_ "" ,8 
Air behind the 
device moves 
with velocity 
-Vi-V­
relative to the lab. 
Figure 3.2 
j 
Sketch of the propulsive device moving into 
stationary air with velocity V 00 • 
energy. After the device flies through the room, the air in the laboratory is no longer 
stationary; rather, it is moving in the opposite direction with velocity Vj - V00 • This 
moving air, which is left behind after the device has passed through the laboratory, 
has a kinetic energy per unit mass of f(Vj - V00 ) 2. This kinetic energy is totally 
wasted; it performs no useful service. It is simply a loss mechanism associated with 
the generation of thrust. It is a source of inefficiency. 
We can now define a propulsive efficiency as follows. Recall from basic me­
chanics that when you exert a force on a body moving at some velocity, the power 
generated by that force is · 
Power = force x velocity (3.2) 
See, for example, chapter 6 of Ref. 3 for a derivation of Eq. (3.2). Consider an airplane 
moving with velocity V 00 being driven by a propulsion device with thrust T. The 
useful power, called the power available PA provided by the propulsive device, is 
(3.3) 
However, the propulsive device is actually putting out more power than that given by 
Eq. (3.3) because the device is also producing the wasted kinetic energy in the air left 
behind. Power is energy per unit time. The wasted kinetic energy per unit mass of 
air is ! (Vi - V 00 ) 2, as described above. Since m is the mass flow of air through the 
propulsive device (mass per unit time), then !m(Vi - V00)2 is the power wasted in 
the air jet behind the device. Hence, · 
Total power generated by propulsive device= TV00 + ~m(Vj - V00 ) 2 (3.4) 
The propulsive efficiency.denoted by T/p, can be defined as 
useful power available 
T/ -
P - total power generated 
(3.5] 
149 

===== PDF PAGE 162 =====
150 P A. R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Substituting Eqs. (3.3) and (3.4) into Eq. (3.5), we have 
TV.xi 
T/p = TVoo + !m(Vj - V00 ) 2 
Substituting the thrust equation, Eq. (3.1), into Eq. (3.6), we have 
m(Vj - Voo)Voo 
T/p = m(Vj - V00 )V00 + !m(Vj - Voo)2 
[3.6] 
(3.7] 
By dividing numerator and denominator by m(V1 - V00 )V00 , Eq. (3.7) becomes 
or 
2 
(3,8] 
The nature of the tradeoff between thrust and efficiency is now clearly seen by 
examining Eq. (3.1) with one eye and Eq. (3.8) with the other eye. From Eq. (3.8), 
maximum (100%) propulsive efficiency is obtained when V1 = V00 ; for this case, 
T/p = 1. This makes sense. In this case, when the propulsion device hurtles through 
the laboratory at velocity V 00 into the stationary air ahead of it, and the air is exhausted 
from the device with a velocity V1 relative to the device which is equal to the velocity 
of the device itself (V1 = V00 ), then relative to the laboratory, the air simply appears 
to plop out of the back end of the device with no velocity. In other words, since 
the air behind the device is not moving in the laboratory, there is no wasted kinetic 
energy. On the other hand, if v1 = V00 , Eq. (3.1) shows that T z O. Bere is the 
compromise; we can achieve a maximum propulsive efficiency of 100%, but with no 
thrust-a self-defeating situation. 
In this compromise, we can find the reasons for the existence of the various 
propulsion devices listed in Section 3.1. A propeller, with its relatively large diameter, 
processes a large mass of air, but gives the air only a small increase in velocity, In light 
ofEq. (3.1), a propeller produces thrust by means of a large m with a small l'j = V09 , 
and therefore in light of Eq. (3.8), T/p is high. The propeller is inherently the most 
efficient of the common propulsive devices. However, the thrust of a propeller is 
limited by the propeller tip speed; if the tip speed is near or greater than the speed 
of sound, shock waves will form on the propeller. This greatly increases the drag on 
the propeller, which increases the torque on the reciprocating engine, which reduces 
the rotational speed (rpm) of the engihe, whic,11 reduces the power obtained from the 
engine itself, and which is manifested in a dramatic reduction of thrust. In addition, 
the shock waves reduce the lift coefficient of the affected airfoil sections making up 
the propeller, which further decreases thrust. The net effect is that, at high speeds, a 
propeller becomes ineffective as a good thrust-producing device. This is why there 
are no propeller-driven transonic or supersonic airplanes. 

===== PDF PAGE 163 =====
CH A PT E R 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 
In contrast to a propeller, a gas-turbine jet engine produces its thrust by giving 
a comparably smaller mass of air a much larger increase in velocity. Reflecting on 
Eq. (3.1), we see that m may be smaller than that for a propeller, but Yj - Y00 is much 
larger. Hence, jet engines can produce enough thrust to propel airplanes to transonic 
and supersonic flight velocities. However, because Yj is much larger than Y00 , from 
Eq. (3.8) the propulsive efficiency of a jet engine will be less than that for a propeller. 
Because of the tradeoffs discussed above, in modern aeronautics we see low­
speed airplanes powered by the reciprocating engine/propeller combination, because 
of the increased propulsive efficiency, and we see high-speed airplanes powered by 
jet engines, because they can produce ample thrust to propel aircraft to transonic and 
supersonic speeds. We also see the reason for a turbofan engine-a large multiblade 
fan driven by a turbojet core-which is designed to generate the thrust of a jet engine 
but with an efficiency that is more reflective of propellers. An even more direct 
combination is a propeller driven by a gas-turbine engine-the turboprop--which 
has a nice niche with airplanes in the 300 to 400 mi/h range. 
In summary, the 'purpose of this section has been to give you an overall understand­
ing of the fundamental tradeoffs associated with different flight propulsion devices. 
This understanding is helpful for studies of airplane performance and discussions 
about airplane design. In the subsequent sections, we briefly examine those aspects 
of each class of propulsive device which are directly relevant to our considerations of 
airplane performance and design. 
3.3 THE RECIPROCATING ENGINE/PROPELLER 
COMBINATION 
The basic operation of a four-stroke spark-ignition engine is illustrated in Fig. 3.3. 
Illustrated here is a piston-cylinder arrangement, where the translating, up-and-down 
movement of the piston is converted to rotary motion of the crankshaft via a con­
necting rod. On the intake stroke (Fig. 3.3a), the intake valve is open, the piston 
moves down, and fresh fuel-air mixture is sucked into the cylinder. During the com­
pression stroke (Fig. 3.3b), the valves are closed, the piston moves up, and the gas 
in the cylinder is compressed to a higher pressure and temperature. Combustion is 
initiated approximately at the top of the compression stroke; as a first approxima­
tion, the combustion is fairly rapid, and is relatively complete before the piston has a 
chance to move very far. Hence, the combustion is assumed to take place at constant 
volume. During combustion, the pressure increases markedly. This high pressure on 
the face of the piston drives the piston down on the power stroke (Fig. 3.3c). This is 
the main source of power from the engine. Finally, the exhaust valve opens, and the 
piston moves up on the exhaust stroke, pushing most of the burned fuel-air mixture 
out of the cylinder. Then the four-stroke cycle is repeated. This four-stroke internal 
combustion engine concept has been in existence for more than a century; it was 
developed by Nikolaus Otto in Germany in 1876 and patented in 1877. (Strangely 
enough, although Otto worked in Germany, his 1877 patent was taken out in the 
151 

===== PDF PAGE 164 =====
PART 1 
Spark plug, 
Crank 
( and crankshaft) 
INTAKE STROKE 
Intake valve opens, 
thus admitting charge 
of fuel and air. Exhaust 
valve closed for most of 
stroke. 
POWER OR WORK STROKE 
Fuel-air mixture burns, 
increasing temperature 
and pressure, expansion 
of combustion gases 
drives piston down. Both 
valves closed -Exhaust 
valve opens near end of 
stroke. 
(a) 
(c) 
Preliminary Considerations 
Both valves closed. 
Fuel-air mixture is 
compressed by rising 
piston. Spark ignites 
mixture near end of 
stroke. 
EXHAUST STROKE 
Exhaust valve open, 
exhaust products are 
displaced from cylinder. 
Intake valve opens near 
end of stroke. 
(b) 
(d) 
figure 3.3 Diagram of the four-stroke Ollo cycle for internal combustion spark-ignition engines. (After Edward F. 
Obert, Internal Combustion Engines and Air Pollution, lntexf, 1973.) 
United States.) Appropriately, the four-stroke process illustrated in Fig. 3.3 is called 
the Otto cycle. 
The business end of the reciprocating engine is the rotating crankshaft-this is 
the means 
by which the engine's power is transmitted to the outside world-a wheel 

===== PDF PAGE 165 =====
C H A P T E R 3 e Some Propulsion Characteristics 
axle in the case of an automobile, or a propeller in the case of an airplane. On what 
characteristics of the engine does this power depend? The answer rests on three 
primary features. First, there is the shear size of the engine, as described by the 
displacement. On its travel from the top of a stroke (top dead center) to the bottom 
of the stroke (bottom dead center), the piston sweeps out a given volume, called the 
displacement of the cylinder. The total displacement of the engine is that for a cylinder, 
multiplied by the number of cylinders; we denote the displacement by d. The larger 
the displacement, the larger the engine power output, everything else being the same. 
Second, the number of times the piston moves through its four-stroke cycle per unit 
time will influence the power output. The more power strokes per minute, the greater 
the power output of the engine. Examining Fig. 3.3, we note that the shaft makes 2 
revolutions (r) for each four-stroke cycle. Clearly, the more revolutions per minute 
(rpm), the more power will be generated. Hence, the power output of the engine is 
directly proportional to the rpm. Third, the amount of force applied by the burned gas 
on the face of the piston after combustion will affect the work performed during each 
power stroke. Hence, the higher the pressure in the cylinder during the power stroke, 
the larger will be the power output. An average pressure which is indicative of the 
pressure level in the cylinder is defined as the mean effective pressure Pe· Therefore, 
we can state that the power output from the engine to the crankshaft, called the shaft 
brake power P, is 
[3.9] 
A typical internal combustion reciprocating engine is shown in Fig. 3.4. 
figure 3.4 Textron Lycoming T10 540·AE2A rurbocharged piston engine. 

===== PDF PAGE 166 =====
154 PART l * 
The specific.fuel 
reflects how efficiently the 
internal combustion 
as 
Considerations 
is a technical figure of merit for an which 
is burning fuel and it to power. For an 
the c is defined 
c = weight of fuel burned per unit power per unit time 
or 
time increment 
[3.H)J 
In this book, we will always use consistent units in our calculations, either the English 
engineering system or the international system (See chapter 2 of Ref. 3 for a 
discussion of the significance of consistent units.) Hence, c is expressed in terms of 
the units 
or 
N [c]= -W-s 
However, over the years, conventional engineering practice has the specific 
fuel consumption in the inconsistent units of pounds of fuel consumed per horsepower 
per hour; these are the units you will find in most specifications for internal combustion 
reciprocating engines. To emphasize this difference, we will denote the specific fuel 
consumption in these inconsistent !.!nits by the symbol SFC. Hence, by definition, 
[SFC] = ~ 
hp-h 
Before making a calculation which involves specific fuel consumption, we always 
convert the inconsistent units of SFC to the consistent units of c. 
3.3.1 Variations of Power and Specific Fuel Consumption with 
Velocity and Altitude 
In Eq. (3.9), Pis the power that comes from the engine shaft; it is sometimes called 
shaft power. Consider the engine mounted on an airplane. As the airplane velocity V 00 
is changed, the only variable affected in Eq. (3.9) is the pressure of the air entering the 
engine manifold, due to the stagnation of the airflow in the engine inlet. (Sometimes 
this is called a ram effect.) In effect, as V 00 increases, this "ram pressure" is 
it is reflected as an increase in Pe in Eq. which in tum increases P via Eq. 
For the high-velocity propeller-driven fighter of World War this effect had 
some significance. are used only on low-speed 
general aviation 
book that 
Hence, we assume in this 
r reasonably-~~nstant with Vc:J 

===== PDF PAGE 167 =====
CHA.PTER 3 @ Some Characteristics 
For the same reason, the specific fuel 
of 
I SFC is constant with V 00 I 
In the United States, two principal manufacturers of aircraft reciprocating engines 
are Teledyne Continental and Textron Lycoming. The horsepower ratings at sea level 
for these engines generally range from 75 to 300 hp. For these engines, a 
value of SFC is 0.4 lb of fuel consumed per horsepower per hour. 
As the airplane's altitude changes, the engine power also changes. This is 
seen in Eq. (3.9). The air pressure (also air density) decreases with an increase in 
altitude; in tum this reduces Pe in Eq. which reduces P. The variation 
of P with altitude is usually given as a function of the local air density. To a first 
approximation, we can assume 
p 
Po 
p 
Po 
1 J 
where P and p are the shaft power and density, respectively, at a altitude 
and Po and ,o0 are the corresponding values at sea level. There is also a temperature 
effect on mean effective pressure Pe in Eq. (3.9). An empirical correlation given by 
Torenbeck (Ref. 35) for the altitude variation of P is 
---i p ! 
''32P 01"'2 I - = l.l - - -~J i 
~----P_o _ ___j 
2] 
The specific fuel consumption is relatively insensitive to in altitude, at 
least for the altitude 
range for general aviation aircraft. Hence, we assume 
SFC is constant with altitude / 
The decrease in power with 
is for engines without 
as indicated 11) and 12), 
as World War I, it was fully recognized 
that this decrease in "'""'""·"'"''""' or at least 
compressing the manifold pressure to values above ambient pressure. This 
coi:npressrn,n is carried out a compressor to the shaft (a 
a small turbine mounted in the exhaust (a 
These devices tend to maintain a constant value of Pe for the 
and hence from (3.9) the power is constant with altitude. 
was for the 
airplanes of the 1930s and 1940s 
described in Section l and 
155 

===== PDF PAGE 168 =====
156 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
Reciprocating 
engine 
Power available p 
Figure 3.5 
3.3.2 The Propeller 
Schematic illustrating shaft power P and 
power available PA from a propeller/ 
reciprocating engine combustion. 
Wilbur Wright in 1902 was the first person to recognize that a propeller is essentially 
a twisted wing oriented vertically to the longitudinal axis of the airplane, and that the 
forward thrust generated by the propeller is essentially analogous to the aerodynamic 
lift generated on a wing. And like a wing, which also produces friction drag, form 
drag, induced drag, and wave drag, a rotating propeller experiences the same sources 
of drag. This propelle~ drag is a loss mechanism; that is, it robs the propeller of some 
useful power. This power loss means that the net power output of the engine/propeller 
combination is always less than the shaft power transmitted to the propeller through the 
engine shaft. Hence, the power available PA from the engine/propeller combination 
is always less than P. This is illustrated schematically in Fig. 3.5. The propeller 
efficiency 1/pr is defined such that 
[3.13] 
where 1/pr < I . 
The propeller efficiency is a function of the advance ratio J, defined as 
Yoo l=-ND 
where Y 00 is the free-stream velocity, N is the number of propeller revolutions per 
second, and D is the propeller diameter. This makes sense when you examine the 
local airflow velocity relative to a given cross section of the propeller, as sketched in 
Fig. 3.6. Here the local relative wind is the vector sum of Y00 and the translational 
motion of the propeller airfoil section due to the propeller rotation, namely, rw, where 
r is the radial distance of the airfoil section from the propeller hub and w is the angular 
velocity of the propeller. The angle between the airfoil chord line and the plane of 

===== PDF PAGE 169 =====
C H A P T E R 3 @ Some Propulsion Characteristics 
\ \'o '::£. \~- 9... 
\~ ~ 
,~ 
\-? 0-
,~ .. ~· 
,i i v= 
~. \ 
~e-j 
\ 
\ /3--,,.1 \ 
a \ L I 
, a 70 
\o/i 
(a) 
Figure 3.6 
~,,. rw ,;,vi, 
~ 
c> 
f.t-. 
0Q' 
' 
(b) 
Veloci!y and relative wind diagrams for a section of 
a revolving propeller: (a) Case for low V00 and !bi 
case for high V 00 • 
rotation is the pitch angle {3. The angle of attack a is the angle between the chord 
line and the local relative wind. The angle of attack clearly depends on the relative 
values of V 00 and rw. In Fig. 3.6a, V 00 is small, and ot is a fairly large positive value, 
producing an aerodynamic "lift" L acting in the general thrust direction. In Fig. 3.6b. 
the value of V 00 has greatly increased; all other parameters remain the same. Here, 
the relative wind has moved to the other side of the airfoil section, giving rise to 
a negative a and an aerodynamic lift force L pointing in the opposite direction of 
positive thrust. Conclusion: The local angle of attack, and hence the thrust generated 
by the propeller, depends critically on V 00 and rw. Note that rw evaluated at the 
propeller tip is (D /2)(2nN), or 
(rw )1,p = n ND 
Hence, the ratio V 00 / rev, which sets the direction of the local relative wind (see Fig. 
3.6), is given 
Voo ---
rw r(2rrN) 
Evaluated at the propeller Eq. (3.14) gives 
(Voo) = 
\ T(J) tip (D /2)(2rrN) 
Voo 
nND 
J 
[3.14] 
[3. i 5] 
Clearly, from Eq. (3. the advance ratio J, a dimensionless quantity, plays a strong 
role in propeller perfomwnce; indeed, dimensional analysis shows that J is a simi­
la.r:ity parameter for propeller performance, in the same category as the Mach number 
157 

===== PDF PAGE 170 =====
158 
3.1 
PART Preliminary Considerations 
and Reynolds number. Hence, we should 
opening statement of this "'~1""''""'"" is indeed a function of J. 
A typical variation of IJpr with J is given in Fig. 
imental measurements of Hartman and Biermann 
obtained from the exper-
37) for an NACA 
with a Clark Y airfoil section and three blades. Seven separate 
curves are shown in Fig. 3.7, each one for a different propeller 
sured at the station 75% of the blade hub. Lll\.a""""'I'. 
figure, we see that T/pr for a fixed 
goes through a maximum value at some value of J, and then goes to O at 
value of J. Let us examine the 
shape. First, the reason why T/pr = 0 at J = 0 is seen from 
Consider an ai,piane at zero velocity motionless on the 
running, thrust 
with the 
From Eq. 
PA = 0 when = O; no power is 
mechanism is generating thrust When 
PA is O but P is finite- P is the shaft power 
reciprocating engine and is not a direct function of 
even though the 
is applied in this case, 
from the intemai combustion 
= 0, 
(3. dictates that iJpr = 0. Also, .vhen = 0, then J = = 0. This is 
why 17pr = 0 at J = 0 for all the curves shown in 3.7. 
The of the curve as J is increased above O is explained 
as follows. For the variation of 17pr with J for a 
is sketched generically in Fig. 3.8a. Also, the variation of the 
a airfoil cross section versus angle of attack is sketched generically 
in Fig. 3.8b. We will discuss the shown in keeping in mind the 
geometry shown in Fig. 3.6. For a f3 for a propeller cross 
section is by definition. in mind that a propeller blade is twisted; hence 
,B is different for each cross is one where the value 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 l.O L4 1.6 l.8 2.0 2.4 2.6 
"It!'"""'"" as a function of odvonce ratio fur various Three·bladoo 
Y iection;;, Raf. 

===== PDF PAGE 171 =====
11pr 
Figure 3.8 
(a) Propeller efficiency 
c H A P T E R 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 
l= v= ND 
3 
( b) Lift-to-drag ratio of a given 
propeller airfoil cross-section 
Effect of section lift-to-drag ratio on propeller efficiency. 
of f3 at any given cross section is essentially "locked in" mechanically, i.e., the pilot 
cannot change f3 during flight.) Examine Fig. 3.6. For a given N, rw is constant. 
However, as the airplane changes its velocity, V 00 will change, and consequently the 
angle of attack a will change, as shown in Fig. 3.6. At V00 = 0, the angle of attack 
is the same as the angle between the propeller airfoil chord line and the plane of 
rotation; that is, the angle of attack is also the pitch angle (for this case only, where 
V 00 = 0). For a pitch angle of, say, 30°, the angle of attack is also 30°; for this case 
the airfoil section most likely would be stalled. This situation is labeled in Fig. 3.8a 
and b by point 1. In Fig. 3.8a, J = 0 when V 00 = 0, hence point 1 is at the origin. 
The angle of attack is large; this is indicated in Fig. 3.8b by point 1 being far out on 
the right-hand side of the L/ D curve. Returning to Fig. 3.6, we imagine that V00 is 
increased, keeping N constant; this gives us point 2, illustrated in Fig. 3.8. Note from 
Fig. 3.8b that L / D is increased; that is, the given airfoil section is now operating with 
an improved aerodynamic efficiency. Let us continue to increase V 00 , say, to a value 
such that the angle of attack corresponds to the peak value of L/ D; this is shown as 
point 3 in Fig. 3.8b. Also, if all the other propeller airfoil cross sections are designed 
to simultaneously have a correspond to the point of (L/ D)max, then the net efficiency 
of the propeller will be maximum, as shown by point 3 in Fig. 3.8a. Let us continue to 
increase V 00 , keeping everything else the same. The angle of attack will continue to 
decrease, say, to point 4 in Fig. 3.8b. However, this corresponds to a very low value 
of L/ D, and hence will result in poor propeller efficiency, as indicated by point 4 in 
Fig. 3.8a. Indeed, if V 00 is increased further, the local relative wind will eventually 
flip over to a direction below the airfoil chord line, as shown in Fig. 3.6b, and the 
direction of the local lift vector will flip also, acting in the negative thrust direction. 
When this happens, the propeller efficiency is totally destroyed, as indicated by point 
5 in Fig. 3.8a and b. 
159 

===== PDF PAGE 172 =====
160 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
In summary, we have explained why the curve of 1'/pr versus J first increases as 
J is increased, then peaks at a value (1'/pr)max, and finally decreases abruptly. This is 
why the propeller efficiency curves shown in Figs. 3.7 and 3.8a look the way they do. 
In Section 1.2.3, we mentioned that a technical milestone of the era of the mature 
propeller-driven airplane was the development of the variable-pitch propeller, and 
subsequently the constant-speed propeller. Please return to Section 1.2.3, and review 
the discussion surrounding these propeller developments. This review will help you 
to better understand and appreciate the next two paragraphs. 
For fixed-pitch propellers, which were used exclusively on all airplanes until the 
early 1930s, the maximum 1'/pr is achieved at a specific value of J (hence a specific 
value of V 00 ). This value of J was considered the design point for the propeller, and 
it could correspond to the cruise velocity, or velocity for maximum rate of climb, 
or whatever condition the airplane designer considered most important. However, 
whenever V 00 was different from the design speed, 1'/pr decreased precipitously, as 
reflected in Fig. 3.8a. The off-design performance of a fixed-pitch propeller caused a 
degradation of the overall airplane performance that became unacceptable to airplane 
designers in the 1930s. However, the solution to this problem is contained in the data 
shown in Fig. 3.7, where we see that maximum 1'/pr for different pitch angles occurs 
at different values of J. Indeed, for the propeller data shown in Fig. 3.7, the locus 
of the points for maximum 1'/pr forms a relatively flat envelope over a large range of 
J (hence V 00 ), at a value of approximately (1'/pr)max = 0.85. Clearly, if the pitch of 
the propeller could be changed by the pilot during flight so as to ride along this flat 
envelope, then high propeller efficiency could be achieved over a wide range of V 00 • 
Thus, the variable-pitch propeller was born; here the entire propeller blade is rotated 
by a mechanical mechanism located in the propeller hub, and the degree of rotation 
is controlled by the pilot during flight. The improvement in off-design propeller 
performance brought about by the variable-pitch propeller was so compelling that 
this design feature is ranked as one of the major aeronautical technical advances of 
the 1930s. 
However, the variable-pitch propeller per se was not the final answer to propeller 
design during the era of the mature propeller-driven airplane; rather, an improvisation 
called the constant-speed propeller eventually supplanted the variable-pitch propeller 
in most high-performance propeller-driven airplanes. To understand the technical 
merit of a constant-speed propeller, first return to Eq. (3.13). The power available 
from a reciprocating engine/propeller combination depends not only on propeller 
efficiency 1'/pr, but also on the shaft power P coming from the engine. In tum, P is 
directly proportional to the rotational speed (rpm) of the engin~, as shown in Eq. (3.9). 
For a given throttle setting, the rpm of a piston engine depends on the load on the 
crankshaft. (For example, in your automobile, with the gas pedal depressed a fixed 
amount, the engine rpm actually slows down when you start climbing a hill, and hence 
your automobile starts to slow down; the load on the engine while climbing the hill 
is increased, and hence the engine rpm decreases for a fixed throttle setting.) For an 
airplane, the load on the shaft of the piston engine comes from the aerodynamic torque 
created on the propeller; this torque is generated by the component of aerodynamic 
force exerted on the propeller in the plane of rotation, acting through a moment arm 

===== PDF PAGE 173 =====
C H A P T E R 3 ~ Some Propulsion Characteristics 
to the shaft. This aerodynamic component is a resistance force, tending to retard the 
rotation of the propeller. In the case of the variable-pitch propeller, as the pilot changed 
the pitch angle, the torque changed, which in turn caused a change in the engine rpm 
away 
from the optimum value for engine operation. This was partially self-defeating; 
in the quest to obtain maximum 7/pr by varying the propeller pitch, the engine power 
P was frequently degraded by the resulting change in rpm. Thus, the constant-speed 
propeller was born. The constant-speed propeller is a variant .of the variable-pitch 
propeller wherein the pitch of the propeller is varied by a govemer 
mechanism so as to maintain a constant rpm for the engine. Although the constant­
speed propeller is not always operating at maximum efficiency, the product T/prP in 
Eq. (3.13) is optimized. Also, the automatic feature of the constant-speed propeller 
frees the pilot to concentrate on other things-something especially important in 
combat 
The use of variable-pitch and constant-speed propellers greatly enhances the rate 
of climb for airplanes, compared to that for a fixed-pitch propeller. (Rate of climb 
is one of the important airplane performance characteristics discussed in detail in 
Chapter 5.) This advantage-is illustrated in Fig. 3.9 from Carter (Ref. 38) dating from 
1940. Figure 3.9 is shown as much for historical value as for technical edification; 
Carter's book was a standard text in practical airplane aerodynamics during the 1930s, 
and Fig. 3.9 shows clearly how much the advantage of a constant-speed propeiler was 
appreciated by that time. In Fig. 3.9, the altitude versus horizontal distance climb 
path of a representative airplane is shown for three different propellers-fixed-pitch, 
two-position controllable (a kind of variable-pitch propeller with only two settings), 
and constant-speed. Tick marks at various points along each flight path give the 
time required from take off to reach that point Clearly, the propeller 
yields much better climb performance, that reaches a 
figure 3.9 
OISTANCE 
Comparison of airplooe dimb performance for three types of propellers: 
!wo-position (controlloble), and constant-speed. Historic diagram by Corter 

===== PDF PAGE 174 =====
PART 1 @ Considerations 
and over a shorter horizontal distance-a characteristic particularly important for t.'le 
high-performance airplanes that characterize the em of the mature propeller-driven 
airplane. 
Finally, we note another advantage of being able to vary the propeller pitch, 
namely, feathering of the propeller. A propeller is feathered when its pitch is adjusted 
so that the drag is minimized, and 
there is little or no tendency for autorotation when 
the engine is turned off but the airplane is still moving. The propeller is feathered 
when an engine failure occurs in and sometimes when a multiengine airplane 
is taxiing on the ground with one or more engines turned off. 
3.4 THE TURBOJET ENGINE 
The basic components of a turbojet engine are illustrated schematically in Fig. 3.10:a, 
and the generic variations (averaged over a local cross section) of static pressure p, 
static temperature and flow velocity V with axial distance through the engine are 
shown in Fig. 3.10b, c, and d, respectively. Flow enters the inlet diffuser with es­
sentially the free-stream velocity V 00 . reality, the velocity entering the inlet is 
usually slightly slower or faster than V 00 , depending on the engine operating condi­
tions; nature takes care of the adjustment to an inlet velocity different from in that 
portion of the stream tube of air which enters the but upstream of the entrance 
to the inlet.) In the diffuser (l-2), the air is slowed, with a consequent increase in 
p and T. It then enters the compressor (2-3), where work is done on the air by the 
rotating compressor blades, hence greatly increasing both p and T, After discharge 
from the compressor, the air enters the burner where it is mixed with 
fuel and burned at essentially constant pressure (3--4). The burned fuel-air mixture 
then expands through a turbine which extracts work from the gas; the turbine 
is connected to the compressor by a and the work extracted from the turbine is 
transmitted via the shaft to operate the compressor. Finally, the gas expands through 
a nozzle (5-6) and is exhausted into the air with the jet velocity Vj. 
The thrust generated by the engine is due to the net resultant of the pressure and 
shear stress distributions acting on the exposed surface areas, internal and external, at 
each point at which the gas contacts any of the as described in Section 32. 
3, lOe illustrates how each contributes to the thrust: 
is a of the "thrust buildup" for the The internal 
duct of the diffuser and compressor has a of surface area that faces in the 
thrust direction the left in pressure in the diffuser and 
in the compressor, area, creates a force 
in the thrust direction, Note in 3.lOe that the accumulated thrust T grows with 
distance the diffuser and the compressor This pressure also 
acts on a component of area in the so that the accumulated 
value of T continues to increase with distance as shown in 
3 .1 Oe. in the turbine and the net surface area has a coi:noonient 
that faces in the rearward and the pressure 
area creates a force in the thrust direction in 
the accumulated thrust F decreases uuvu,,.,,, 

===== PDF PAGE 175 =====
v~ 
Diffuser Compressor Burner Nozzle (a) 
V 
F 
Figure 3.10 
FORWARD ASL A 57, 361b. 
( 1s.04s1b. I 
COMPRESSOR 
TOTAL THRUST 11, 15Blb. 
COMBUSTION 
CHAMBER 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
• 
(f) 
I I 
PROPELLING 
NOZZLE 
TURBINE 
EXHAUST UNITI 
I I AND JET PIPE I I 
I I I I 
Distribution of (a) components, {b) pressure, (c) temperature, (d) velocity, and 
(e) local thrust; (f) integrated thrust through a generic turbojet engine. 
163 

===== PDF PAGE 176 =====
P A R T 1 e Preliminary Considerations 
shown in Fig. 3. lOe. However, by the time the nozzle exit is reached (point 6), the net 
accumulated thrust Fnet is still a positive value, as shown in Fig. 3.10e. This is the net 
thrust produced by the engine, faat is, T = Fnet· A more diagrai.n.'Ilatic illustration 
of the ti'uust distribution exerted on a turbojet is shown in Fig. 3. lOf. 
The detailed calculation of the pressure and shear stress distributions over the 
complete internal surface of the engine would be a herculean task, even in the present 
day of lhe sophisticated computational fluid dynawJcs (CFD). (See Ref. 39 for an 
introductory book on CFD, written for beginners in the subject). However, the major 
jet engine manufacturers are developing tl1e CFD expertise that will eventually allow 
such a calculation. Fortunately, the calculation of jet engine thrust is carried out 
infinitely more simply by drawing a control volume around the engine, looking at 
the time rate of change of momentum of the gas flow through the engine, and using 
Newton's second law to obtain the thrust. To a certain extent, we have already carried 
out this control volume analysis in Section 3.2, obtaining Eq. (3.1) for the thrust. 
However, in that derivation we simplified the analysis by not including the pressure 
acting on the front and back free surfaces of the control volume, and by not considering 
the extra mass due to the fuel added. A more detailed derivation (see, e.g., chapter 
9 of Ref. 3) leads to a thrust equation which is slightly more refined than Eq. (3.I), 
namely, 
I T = (mair + mfuel) Vj - marr Voo + (Pe - Poo) Ae I [3.16] 
where rhair and rhfoel are the mass flows of the air and fuel, respectively, Pe is the gas 
pressure at the exit of the nozzle, p00 is the ambient pressure, and Ae is the exit area 
of the nozzle. The first two terms on the right side of Eq. (3.16) are the time rate of 
change of momentum of the gas as it flows through the engine; these terms play the 
same role as the right-hand side of Eq. (3.1). The pressure term (Pe - p00 )Ae in Eq. 
(3.16) is usually much smaller than the momentum terms. As a first approximation, 
it ca.r1 be neglected, just as we did in obtaining Eq. (3.1). 
A typical turbojet engine is shown in the photograph in Fig. 3.11. A cutaway 
drawing of a turbojet is given in Fig. 3.12, showing the details of the compressor, 
burner, turbine, and nozzle. 
The specific fuel consumption for a turbojet is defined differently than that for 
a reciprocating piston engine given by Eq. (3.10). The measurable primary output 
from a jet engine is thrust, whereas that for a piston engine is power. Therefore, for a 
turbojet the specific fuel consumption is based on thrust rather than power; to make 
this clear, it is frequently celled the thrust specific fuel consumption. We denote it by 
c1, and it is defined as 
c1 = weight of fuel burned per unit thrust per unit time 
or 
weight of fuel consumed for given time increment 
Ct= 
(thrust output) (time increment) 
[3, 17] 

===== PDF PAGE 177 =====
C H A P T E R 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 165 
Figure 3.11 Rolls-Royce Conway RCo.10 turbojet engine. (Courtesy of Rolls Royce.) 
Figure 3.12 Rolls-Royce Viper 632 turbojet. (Courtesy of Rolls Royce.) 
Consistent units for c1 are 
lb 1 
[er]= - = -lb-s s 

===== PDF PAGE 178 =====
166 P A R T 1 @ Preliminary Considerations 
or 
N 1 
[er]== -T- == _: N-s s 
However, analogous to the case of the piston engine, the thrust specific fuel consump­
tion (TSFC) has been conventionally defined using the inconsistent time unit of hour 
instead of second. To emphasize this difference, we will use the symbol TSFC for 
the thrust specific fuel consumption in inconsistent units. Hence, by definition, 
lb 1 
[TSFC] = - = -lb-h h 
3.4. i Variations of Thrust and Specific Fuel Consumption 
Velocity and Altitude 
The thrust generated by a turbojet is given by Eq. (3.16). Questions: When the 
engine is mounted on an airplane flying through the atmosphere, how does the thrust 
vary with flight velocity? With altitude? Some hints regarding the answers can be 
obtained by examining the thrust equation given by Eq. (3. First, consider the 
mass flow of air m.air· The mass tlow of air entering the inlet (location 1 in Fig. 3. 
is p00 A I V 00 , where A 1 is the cross-sectional area of the inlet. As V 00 is increased, 
Vj stays essentially the same (at least to first order); the value of Vj is much more 
a function of the internal compression and combustion processes taking place inside 
the engine than it is of V 00 • Hence, the difference Vj - V 00 tends to decrease as V 00 
increases. From Eq. (3.16), with V00 increasing but Vj staying about the same, the 
value of T is decreased. These two effects tend to cancel in Eq. (3.16), and therefore 
we might expect the thrust generated by a turbojet to be only a weak function of V 00 . 
This is indeed the case, as shown in Fig. 3.13 based on data from Hesse and Mumford 
(Ref. 40). Here the thrust for a typical small turbojet is given as a function of flight 
Mach number for two altitudes, sea level and 40,000 ft, and for three different throttle 
settings (denoted by different compressor rpm values) at each altitude. Note that, 
especially at altitude, T is a very weak function of Mach number. Hence, to a first 
approximation, in this book we consider that, for a turbojet flying at subsonic speeds, 
T is reasonably constant with V 00 
A typical variation of TSFC for the same small turbojet is given in Fig. 3.14, 
also based on data from Ref. 40. Here we see a general trend where TSFC increases 
monotonically with flight Mach number. Note that, at low speed, the TSFC is about 
l lb of fuel/(lb of thrust/h)-an approximate value used frequently in airplane per­
formance analyses. However, at high velocities, the increase in TSFC should be 
taken into account. Based on the data shown in Fig. 3.14, we write as a reasonable 
approximation,for < 1, 
TSFC =LO+ kM00 HJ] 

===== PDF PAGE 179 =====
C H A P T E R 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 
7,000 
' I~ 
?--.,. L,....-(y-{~v 
'! 1 l Sea level 100% rpm D-
I I I 90% rpm I:, 
80% rpmO 
6,000 
5,000 
~ 
40,000ft 100% rpm•-
I", 
90% rpm.A 
] 4,000 
" z 
3,000 ~ 
2,000 
~ 
-
1,000 
0 
o. 
Figure 3.13 
1'.. 80% rpme 
r----. ~ -.., -~ 
\~ 
~ ', ~ ~ 
)..._ 
--
~ 
~ 
~ -
~ ;.....,,.,, 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
Mach number 
Typical results for the variation of thrust with 
subsonic Moch number for a turbojet. 
where k is a function of altitude and throttle setting (engine rpm). For example, the 
data in Fig. 3.14 show that for an altitude of 40,000 ft, k is about 0.5 and is relatively 
insensitive to rpm. 
There is a strong altitude effect on thrust, as can be seen by examining Eq. (3.16). 
Again, we note thatrizair = p00 A 1 V 00 ; hence rizair is directly proportional to p00 • As the 
altitude increases, p00 decreases. In turn, from Eq. (3.16) where T is almost directly 
proportional to rizair, thrust also decreases with altitude. Indeed, it is reasonable to 
express tne variation of T with altitude in terms of the density ratio p / p0 , where p is 
the density at a given ;iltitude and p0 is sea-level density. Hence, 
where T0 is the sea-level thrust. 
~ 
~ 
[3.19] 
In regard to the altitude effect on thrust specific fuel consumption, comparing the 
results in Fig. 3.14 for full throttle (100% rpm) at sea level and at 40,000 ft, we see 
little difference. ltjs reasonable-to ignore this weak altitude effect and to assume that 
167 

===== PDF PAGE 180 =====
168 PART Considerations 
j r ! ( i I l l ! 
n
ievel 100% rpm !ill I l 
30 -J- -,-T · j 90% rpm& 1 
I "09' I I 
:2 !1
1
40,0~0 ftl 1:~~ :: : : i 
'-.. I ' I I 
!:l , I 90% rpm i:,. i , 
l:; I : 80% rpm O I 
= l I I ! 
£:: 2. 0 rt---,--t--t---+--t-,;,4"--,--,----t--:ti 
~ 
,.; : I 
l 1.J; 1_l.~~-~~~ 
" 
] l.51' I I I I I L-~ ~ ·~!+ If I .Lf;f t)co~'. 'f'~ g_ l .. ~, 1.b~"" I ! t ,1 
C/J j O • I • -+' -+--+-+---+I 
.. I I I I . l i 
Ill! ! I I i Ill I I I I 
0.5 _! I ! I __L_jJ 
0 
3.14 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
Mach number 
results for !he voria!ion of !hrusl 
fuel with subsonic 
TSFC is constant with altitu~ 
The above discussion of turbojets at subsonic speeds. 
Let us extend this discussion to the One of the most important 
supersonic of the last has been the Concorde supersonic 
transport (see The Concorde is powered with four Rolls-Royce/SNECMA 
Olympus 593 engines-pure turbojets. The choice of turbojet engines for the Con-
corde instead of turbofan engines be discussed in the next section) keyed on the 
better thrust specific fuel of a at the design cruise Mach number 
of2.2. The variations of both T and thrust fuel with supersonic 
Mach number for the 593 are shown in after 
Mair and Birdsall 
41). Here, 8 = where p and p0 are the pressures at altitude and sea level, 
respectively. In 3.15, Tis in units of kilonewtons, and c1 is in 
terms of the mass of fuel consumed per newton of thrust per second. The results are 
shown for in the that for above 1 or 36,000 ft. 
What is in the variation of T and c1 with Mach number. As 
T at constant altitude increases almost 

===== PDF PAGE 181 =====
l 
40 
! 
i 
,,,,.,.,./" 
from Mach 
for most of the 
increases near Mach 
constant m 
recovered in 
relation 
_.,/ 
H PT[R ~ Som.E; 
! I 
l,/ 
/ 
!!--~i 
,/ 
L/'/ 
! 
//.,,, .. - i 
./ c,. 
l,,-"""/···· 
! 
! 
.2 1 .4 .8 2.0 
the data in 3.13 
total pressures 
Recall from gas 
the 
y/(y-1) 
irilet diffuser is not isen-
total pressure recovered 
v;hich the pressure is further increased 
inside the for 

===== PDF PAGE 182 =====
170 
Fan 
PART 1 @ Considerations 
In regard to the thrust specific fuel consumption at speeds, Fig. 3.15 
shows only a small increase with This is presaged in Fig. 3.14 where c1 is seen 
to bend over and becomes more constant near Mach 1. Hence, at supersonic speeds, 
we can assume that c1 is essentially constant 
Therefore,for M00 > l, we can assume from t.l}e data in Fig. 3.15 that for the 
Olympus 593 turbojet, 
T ---=l+ 
l 
We will take this result as a model for our sut)seqw:nt 
powered aircraft. Also, we will assume that for 
- 1) 
! TSFC is constant withM 00 
3.5 THE TURBOFAN ENGINE 
[3.!U 1 
Recall our discussion in Section 3.2 of the tradeoff between thrnst and efficiency, and 
how a propeller produces less thrust but with more efficiency, whereas a jet engine 
produces more thrust but with less efficiency. The engine is a propulsive 
mechanism the design of which strives to combine the high thrust of a turbojet with 
the high efficiency of a propeller. A schematic of a turbofan is shown in Fig. 3.16. 
Basically, a turbojet engine forms the core of tI1e turbofan; the core contains the 
diffuser, compressor, burner, turbine, and nozzle. However, in the turbofan engine, 
the turbine drives not only the compressor, but also a large fan external to the core. 
The fan itself is contained in a shroud that is wrapped around the core, as shown in 
Fig. 3.16. The flow through a turbofan engine is split into two palhs. One passes 
through the fan and flows externally over the 
core; this air is processed only the 
fan, which is acting in the manner of a sophisticated, shrouded propeller. Hence, 
Compressor 
Turbine 
Burner 
Schematic of a turbofan 

===== PDF PAGE 183 =====
C H A P T E R 3 @ Some 
the propulsive thrust obtained from this flow through the fan is generated with an 
efficiency approaching that of a propeller. The second air path is through the core 
itself. The propulsive thrust obtained from the flow through the core is generated with 
an efficiency associated with a turbojet. The overall propulsive efficiency of a turbofan 
is therefore a compromise between that of a propeller and that of a turbojet. This 
compromise has been found to be quite successful-the vast majority of jet-propelled 
airplanes today are powered by turbofan engines. 
An important parameter of a turbofan engine is the bypass ratio, defined as the 
mass flow passing through the externally to the core (the first path described 
above), divided by the mass flow through the core itself (the second path described 
above). Everything else being equal, the higher the bypass ratio, the higher the 
propulsive efficiency. For the large turbofan engines that power airplanes such as 
the Boeing 747 (see Fig. 1.34), for example, the Rolls-Royce RB21 l and the Pratt & 
Whitney JT9D, the bypass ratios are on the order of 5. Typical values of the thrust 
specific fuel consumption for these turbofan engines are 0.6 lb/(lb·h)-almost half 
that of a conventional turbojet engine. This is why turbofan engines are used on most 
jet-propelled airplanes today. 
A photograph of a typical turbofan engine is shown in Fig. 3.17. A cutaway 
illustrating the details of the fan and the core is shown in Fig. 3-.18. 
Figure 3.17 (a) Rolls-Royce Tay Turbofan. {Courlesy of Rolls-Royce.) (continued) 
171 

===== PDF PAGE 184 =====
I' ART Considerations 

===== PDF PAGE 185 =====
Figure 3.18 
CHAPTER 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 
PW4000 ENGINE 
LOW PflESSURE 
COMPRESSOR 
INLET 
CASE 
/ 
(b) 
(a) Cutaway of the Rolls-Royce Tay. (Courtesy of Rolfs-Royce.) (b) Cutaway of the 
Pratt & Whitney PW 4000 turbofan. (Courtesy of Pratt & Whitney.) (continued) 
173 

===== PDF PAGE 186 =====
174 P A R T 1 ® Preliminary Considerations 
(concluded) 
(c) Cutaway of lhe CFM56-5C high-bypass turbofan. (Courtesy of CFM ln~rm:mono1.; 
3.5. 1 Variations of Thrust and Specific Fu.el Consumption with 
Velocity and Altitude 
We first discuss the characteristics of high-bypass-ratio turbofans-those with bypass 
ratios on the order of 5. These are the class of turbofans that power civil transports. 
The performance of these engines seems to be closer to that of a propeller than that 
of a turbojet in some respects. 
The thrust of a civil turbofan engine has a strong variation with velocity; thrust 
decreases as V 00 increases. Let Tv=o be the thrust at standard sea level and at zero flight 
velocity. A typical variation of T / Tv=o with V00 for a range of velocities associated 
with takeoff is shown in Fig. 3.19; the data are for the Rolls-Royce RB2l1-535E4 
turbofan found in Ref. 41. These data fit the curve 
[3.22] 
where V00 is in meters per second and holds for V00 < 130 mis. Caution: Equation 
(3.22) holds for takeoff velocities only. The variation of T / Tv=o for the same engine 
at higher subsonic velocities is shown in Fig. 3.20 for various altitudes from sea levei 
to 11 km. For each altitude. two curves are given. the upper curve for the higher 
thrust used during c!imh and the lower curve for the lower thrust setting for cruise. 
The data are from Ref. 41. For a given, constant altitude, the decrease in thrust with 
Mach number can be correlated by 

===== PDF PAGE 187 =====
C H A P T E R 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 
1.0 ....... ........ 
0.9 
0 
~ i::; 0.8 
0.7 
> 
0 
Figure 3.19 
0.6 
0.5 
0 
J "- 0.4 
E,... 
0.3 
0.2 
Figure3.20 
........ ...... 
-... r--,.... 
r--.. ....... ...... ........ 
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 
v_,mls 
Maximum takeoff thrust as a function of velocity 
at sea level for the Rolls-Royce RB211-535E4 turbofan. 
' 
' Cruise rating 
' --- -
' ' --- Climb rating 
·o 
, .......... 
' ...... 
' ........ ..... ,o I - Heights in kilometers 
"' ..... t 
, ... 3 
"'-~ 
...... ... _ 
....... 
r-.......... 3 .... 
i--.._ 6 
- - """ -........ 
6 ~ r--
-- - ---9 
-- - -II 
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0,8 0.9 
M_ 
Variation of maximum thrust with Mach number and altitude 
for the Rolls-Royce RB211-535E4 turbofan. Note that Tv=O is 
the thrust at zeto velocity at sea level. 
175 

===== PDF PAGE 188 =====
176 P A R T 1 •. Preliminary Considerations 
[3.23] 
where A and n are functions of altitude. For example, at an altitude of 3 km, a 
reasonable correlation for the climb-rating thrust is 
_!__ = 0.369M,:;;;°"305 
Tv=o 
[3.24] 
Keep in mind thatEqs. (3.22) to (3.24), as well as the curves in Figs. 3.19 and 3.20, are 
for a Rolls-Royce RB211 engine (designed for use with the Boeing 747 and similar 
large transport aircraft). They ~e given here only to illustrate the general trends. 
Although the variation of T for a: civil turbofan is a strong function of V 00 ( or 
M00 ) at lower altitudes, note from Fig. 3.20 that at the relatively high altitude of 11 
km, Tis relatively constant for the narrow Mach number range from 0. 7 to 0.85. This 
corresponds to normal cruise Mach numbers for civil transports such as the Boeing 
747. Hence, for the analysis of airplane performance in the cruise range, it appears 
reasonable to assume T = constant. 
The variation of T with altitude is approximated by 
[3.25] 
as given by Mattingly et al. (Ref. 43) and Mair and Birdsall (Ref. 41). Equation (3.25) 
is an empirical relation which holds for a large number of civil turbofan engines. The 
value of m depends on the engine design; it is usually near 1, but could be less than 
or greater than 1. 
The variation of thrust specific fuel consumption• with both altitude and Mach 
number is shown in Fig. 3.21 for the Rolls-Royce RB211-535E4 turbofan. Here, 
crf Ct00 is the ratio of the thrust specific fuel consumption at the specified altitude and 
Mach number, denoted by Ct, to the value of Ct at zero velocity and at sea level, denoted 
by Ct00 • The variation of Ct with velocity at a given altitude follows the relation 
Ct_= B(l+ kMcx,) [3.26] 
where B and k are empirical constants found by correlating the data. Equation (3.26) 
is valid only for a}imited range of M00 around the. cruise value 0. 7 < M00 < 0.85. A 
glance at Fig. 3.21 shows why turbofans were not used on the Concorde supersonic 
transport, with its cruising Mach number of2.2. As mentioned in Section 3.4, the 
thrust specific fuel consumption of a turbojet engine is almost constant with speed in 
the supersonic regime. However, for a turbofan, Ct increases markedly with increases 
in M00 , as shown in Fig. 3.21. For this reason, a turbojet is more fuel-efficient than a 
turbofan is at the design 
Mach number of 2.2 for the Concorde. 
The ordinate in Fig. 3.21 is expanded. Hence, the altitude effect on Ct looks 
larger than it really is. For example, at M00 = p.7, there is about an 11 % reduction 
of Ct when the altitude is increased from 3 to 11 km. Therefore, to first order, we 
assume the c1 is constant with altitude. 

===== PDF PAGE 189 =====
C H A P T E R 3 "' Some Propulsion Characteristics 
For low-bypass-ratio turbofans-those with bypass ratios between O and 1-the 
performance is somewhat different from that for the high-bypass-ratio case discussed 
above. The performance of low-bypass-ratio turbofansis much closer to that of a 
turbojet than that of a propeller, in contrast to the civil turbofan discussed earlier. 
Low-bypass-ratio turbofans are used on many high-performance jet fighter planes of 
today, such as the McDonnell-Douglas F-15. Typical generic variations of T /Tv=o 
and c1 /c100 versus M00 for a military, low-bypass-ratio turbofan are given in Fig. 3.22. 
Figure 3.21 
3 
2 
0 
II 
l.8 
I 
1.7 
I 
J ov 
I 
I 
i I I 
I V 
I' 
I/ 
l.5 
I J 
0.4 0.5 
V 
J 
!/ 
i 
I, 
/ 
I 
/3 6/ 
I' , 
/ 
/ 
0.6 
M~ 
I 
,I ,.v 
I / ,.v I/ 
/ ,r 
V ,I 
/ ,,.v V 
/ ,I V Heights 
/11 1....- in 
9 kilometers , 
I 
0.7 0.8 
Variation of thrust specific fuel consumption with subsonic Mach number 
and altitude for the Rolls-Royce RB211-535E4 turbofon. Note that c,00 is the 
thrust specific fuel consumption al zero velocity at sea level. 
0.7 
0.6 _.,,.. V 
'"'" 
/ 
-
6 .... , / 
i-- ,, 
0.5 :.- ........ 1,, ..... 
- ,...,.. ....... 
j 
'-' ~ 0.4 
" 
ll _,,. ~ --.. ....... --pl.!,. V "I'.. 
<.;~ 
" f-, 
0 
figure 3.22 
- -,_ -
0.3 
- -
-- TITv=O "" _,,,,.. 
-
L-- --- c1/c1= 
0.2 
f1' -· I I 
_i,-- Heights in kilometers -...~ 
0.1 I 
0.6 0.8 !.O 1.6 l.8 2.0 2.2 
Variation of thrust and thrust specific fuel consumption with subsonic and 
supersonic Mach number and altitude for a generic mililary rurbofan. 
177 

===== PDF PAGE 190 =====
i78 P A R T 1 ,::, Preliminary ConsideratioEs 
In contrast to the civil turbofan, here we see that after a small initial decrease at low 
subsonic Mach the thrust increases for Mach number well above 
Mach 1. The typical decrease of thrust with altitude is also indicated in 3.22, 
where thrust curves are shown for altitudes of 6, 11, and I 5 km. 
The dashed line in Fig. 3 .22 gives the variation of thrust specific fuel consumption 
versus Mach number for a military turbofan. Note that c1 for the low-bypass-ratio 
turbofan gradually increases as M 00 increases for subsonic and speeds, and 
begins to rapidly increase at Mach 2 and This is unlike the variation of c1 for 
a pure turbojet engine, which is relatively constant in the low supersonic regime (see 
Fig. 3.15). 
3.6 THE TURBOPROP 
The turboprop is essentially a propeller driven by a gas-turbine engine. Therefore, 
of aH the gas-turbine devices described in this chapter, the turboprop is closest to the 
reciprocating engine/propeller combination discussed in Section 33. A schematic of 
a turboprop engine is shown in Fig. 3.23. Here, similar to the turbojet, the inlet air 
is compressed by an axial-flow compressor, mixed with fuel and burned in the com­
bustor, expanded through a turbine, and then exhausted through a nozzle. However, 
unlike the turbojet, the turbine powers not only the compressor but also the propeller. 
In Fig. 3.23 a twin-spool arrangement is shown; the compressor is divided into two 
stages-low-pressure and high-pressure-where each stage is driven by a separate 
turbine-the low-pressure turbine and high-pressure turbine. The high-pressure tur­
bine drives the high-pressure compressor. The low-pressure turbine drives both the 
low-pressure compressor and the propeller. By design, most of the available work in 
the flow is extracted by the turbines, leaving little available for jet thrust. For most 
turboprops, only about 5% of the total thrust is associated with the jet exhaust, and 
Figure 3.23 
Low-pressure 
compressor 
High-pressure 
turbine 
High-pressure 
compressor 
' ) 
' J 
Low-pressure 
turbine 

===== PDF PAGE 191 =====
CHAPTER 3 ;,; Some Propulsion Characteristics 
the remaining 95% comes from the In regard to the thrust and efficiency 
tradeoff discussed in Section 3.2, the turboprop falls in between the reciprocating 
engine/propeller combination and the turbofan or turbojet. The turboprop generates 
more thrust than a reciprocating engine/propeller but less than a turbofan or 
turbojet. On the other the has a specific fuel consumption 
than that of the reciprocating combination, but lower than that of 
a turbofan or turbojet. in mind that the above are broad statements and are 
made only to give you a for these tradeoffs. Definitive statements can only 
be made by comparing specific real engines with one another.) the maximum 
flight speed of a turboprop-powered is limited to that at which the propeller 
efficiency becomes seriously degraded shock 
wave formation on the propeller-
usually around M 00 = 0.6 to 0.7. A photograph of a turboprop engine is shown in 
Fig. 3.24a, and a cutaway of the same engine is in Fig. 3.24b. 
(b) 
3,24 A c:.itaway of 
179 

===== PDF PAGE 192 =====
HIO P A,. R T 1 ® Preliminary Considerations 
As noted above, the thrust generated by the turboprop is the sum of the propeller 
thrust Tp and the jet thrust Tj. For the engine in flight at velocity V 00 , the power 
available from the turboprop is 
I PA=(Tp+T1)V 00 I [3.21] 
Because of its closeness to the reciprocating engine/propeller mechanism, where the 
rating of engine performance is in terms of power rather than thrust, the performance 
of a turboprop is frequently measured in terms of power. The main business end of 
a turboprop is the shaft coming from the engine to which the propeller is attached 
via some type of gearbox mechanism. Hence the shaft power P, coming from the 
engine is a meaningful quantity. Because of losses associated with the propeller as 
described in Section 
3.3.2, the power obtained from the propeller/shaft combination 
is 'f/prPs. Hence, the net power available, which includes the jet thrust, is 
I PA = Y/pr Ps + Tj V oo I [3.28] 
Sometimes manufacturers rate their turbuprops in terms of the equivalent shaft power 
Pes which is an overall power rating that includes the effect of the jet thrust. Here, 
we imagine that all the power from the engine is being delivered through the shaft 
(although we know that a part of it-about 5%-is really due to jet thrust). The 
equivalent shaft power is defined to be analogous to the shaft power coming from a 
reciprocating engine. Analogous to Eq. (3.13), Pes is defined by 
I PA = Y/prPes 
Combining Eqs. (3.28) and (3.29), we have 
'f/pr Pes = ?/pr Ps + Ti V oo 
Solving Eq. (3.30) for Pes, we obtain 
Tj V00 
Pes = Ps + -­
Y/pr 
[3.29] 
[3.30] 
[3.31] 
Equation (3.31) shows how the defined equivalent shaft power is related to the actual 
shaft power Ps and the jet thrust Tj. 
Turboprop engines clearly have an ambivalence-is thrust or power more ger­
mane? There is no definitive answer to this question, nor should there be. Once 
you become comfortable with Eqs. (3.27) to (3.31), you can easily accept this am­
bivalence. Of course, this ambivalence carries over to the definition of specific fuel 
consumption for a turboprop. Let Wfuel be the weight flow rate of the fuel (say, in 
pounds per second, or newtons per second). Also let T be the total thrust from the 
turboprop, T = Tp + Then the thrust specific fuel consumption can be defined as 
Wfuel 
Ct:=--
T [3.32] 

===== PDF PAGE 193 =====
182 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
subsonic Mach numbers is due to a sharp degradation in TA. The maximum PA occurs 
in a Mach number range around 0.6 to 0.7-the upper limit for turboprop-pqwered 
airplanes. However, the net effect of the combined variation of thrust and V 00 in Fig. 
3.25 is to yield, to a first approximation, a relatively flat variation of PA with M00 • 
Hence, we can make the assumption that 
I PA is constant with M00 I 
for a turboprop. In regard to the altitude variation, the data in Fig. 3.25 are reasonably 
correlated by 
~ = (!!...)n n = 0.7 
PA.o Po 
[3.36] 
For other turboprop engines, the value of n in Eq. (3.36) will be slightly different. 
Typical variations of the specific fuel consumption as a function of M 00 and 
altitude are shown as the upper set of curves in Fig. 3.26, obtained from the data of 
Ref. 40. The specific fuel consumption shown here is CA defined by Eq. (3.33). For 
all practical purposes, the results in Fig. 3.26 show that 
c A is constant with both velocity and altitude 
The lower set of curves. shown in Fig. 3.26 gives the ratio of jet power to total 
power 
Sea level ..... 
'----
1.4 
1.3 
1.2 
l.l 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.-1 
>----30,000 
~18:880 - 20,0 Q 
I 
0 
0 
Figure 3.26 
40 000 Sea level 
' 
/) 10,0( 
/// 
20,00 
30,00 
/. r~ 40,00 
-~Ii" 
0 0 0 
0 
0.1 .0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 
M .. 
1.0 
Variation of specific fuel consumption and ratio of jet to the 
total thrust horsepower with Mach number and altitude for a 
typical turboprop engine. Altitude is given in feet. 

===== PDF PAGE 194 =====
C H A P T E R 3 • Some Propulsion Characteristics 
The specific fuel consumption can also be based on power, but because power can be 
treated as nl!t power available p A, shaft power Ps, or equivalent shaft power Pes, we 
have three such specific fuerconsumptions, defined as 
t.Vfuel 
CA=-­
pA 
t.Vfuel 
Cs=~ 
t.Vfuel 
Ces = -­Pes 
[3.33] 
[3.34] 
[3.35] 
When you examine the manufacturer's specifications for specific fuel consumption 
for a turboprop, it is important to make certain which definition is being used. 
Finally, we note a useful rule of thumb (Ref. 44) that, at static conditions (engine 
operating with the airplane at.zero velocity on the ground), a turboprop produces 
about 2.5 lb of thrust per shaft horsepower. 
3.6. 1 . Variations of Power and· Specific, Fuel Consumption with 
Velocity and Altitude 
A typical variation of power available PA from a turboprop (note that PA includes 
the propeller efficiency) with Mach number and altitude is given in Fig. 3.25, based 
on data from Ref. 40. Keep in mind that as Mach 1 is approached, there is a serious 
degradation of power because of shock formation on the propeller. In Fig. 3.25, 
PA at a given altitude first increases, reaches a maximum, and then decreases as 
M00 increases. Keeping in mind that PA = TA V00 , the decreasing PA at the higher 
7 
~ - Sea
1
Ievel r---.... 
./ 6 
~ 
~ 
10,qoo ft r--. .,,,,... 
i---- 20,000 ft ----·-
~ 30,000 ft 
----
:.- - 40,( )00 ft -
.. 
0 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 
. Figure 3.25 
M~ 
Variation of maximum horsepower available HPA 
as a function of Mach number and altitude for a 
typical turboprop engine. 
181 

===== PDF PAGE 195 =====
182 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
subsonic Mach numbers is due to a sharp degradation in TA. The maximum PA occurs 
in a Mach number range around 0.6 to 0.7-the upper liinit for tµrboprop-powered 
airplanes. However, the net effect of the combined variation of thrust and V 00 in Fig. 
3.25 is to yield, to a first approximation, a relatively flaf variation of PA with M00 • 
Hence, we can make the assumption that 
I PA is constant with M 00 I 
for a turboprop. In regard to the altitude variation, the data in Fig. 3.25 are reasonably 
correlated by 
~ = (f!_)n n = 0.7 
PA,O Po 
[3.36] 
For other turboprop engines, the value of n in Eq. (3.36) will be slightly different. 
Typical variations of the specific fuel consumption as a function of M00 and 
altitude are shown as the upper set of curves in Fig. 3.26, obtained from the data of 
Ref. 40. The specific fuel consumption shown here is CA defined by Eq. (3.33). For 
all practical purposes, the results in Fig. 3.26 show that 
c A is constant with both velocity and altitude 
The lower set of curves. shown in Fig. 3.26 gives the ratio of jet power to total 
power 
1.4 
1.3 
1.2 
1.1 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
Figure 3.26 
Sea level 
--
~I0',00 
>--30,000 ~ 20,0 
P'se~level 
0 
40000 
' h 
///. 
~ ~ 
~~ 
10,001 
20,00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
30,00 
40,00 
I 
I 
0.1 ,0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 o. 7 0.8 o. 9 1.0 
M .. 
Variation of specific fuel consumption and ratio of jet to the 
total thrust horsepower with Mach number and altitude for a 
typical turboprop engine. Altitude is given in feet. 

===== PDF PAGE 196 =====
C H A P T E R 3 13 Some Propulsion Characteristics 
as a function of M00 and altitude. Note that this ratio is less than 0.05 (or 5%) for 
M00 < 0.6--the range for most turboprop-powered airplanes. The ratio increases 
rapidly above Mach 0.6, mainly because Tp is degraded due to shock formation on 
the propeller. 
3.7 MISCELLANEOUS COMMENTS: AFTERBURNING 
AND MORE ON SPECIFIC FUEL CONSUMPTION 
In a turbojet or turbofan engine, the fuel-air mixture in the combustion chamber is 
lean, and hence there is plenty of oxygen left in the exhaust gas that can be used for 
additional burning. A device that takes advantage of this situation is the afterburner, 
wherein extra fuel is injected into the exhaust gas and burned downstream of the 
turbine. A diagram of an afterburner is shown in Fig. 3.27. The afterburner is 
essentially a long duct downstream of the turbine into which fuel is sprayed and 
burned. At the exit of the afterburner duct is a variable-area nozzle; the variable­
area feature is required by the different nozzle flow conditions associated with the 
afterburner turned on or off. 
The afterburner is used for short periods of greatly increased thrust. The Concorde 
supersonic transport uses afterburners for rapid climb and acceleration after takeoff. 
Military fighter airplanes use afterburners for a fast takeoff and for bursts of speed 
during combat. With the afterburner operating, the weight flow of fuel increases 
markedly, so the pilot has to be careful to use the afterburner only when needed. The 
performance of a typical turbofan with afterburner is illustrated in Fig. 3.28. The 
solid curve gives the ratio of the thrust with afterburner on TA 8 to the thrust without 
afterburner as a function of Mach number; clearly the afterburner is an effective device 
Cooling flow 
Bypass airflow 
Fuel 
Afterburner 
Jet pipe 
Figure 3.27 Schematic of an afterburner. 
Nozzle operating 
sleeve 
Re burned 
gases 
Variable 
propelling nozzle 

===== PDF PAGE 197 =====
184 P A R T 1 • Preliminary Considerations 
5 I 
I 
TA8/T I 4 
J 
V 
,I 
-.... ........ V 
,/ 
3 
.. _ v- . I/ ..... cA8/c 
V'" ' _... .. , 
- " 
2 
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Figure 3.28 Effect of afterburning on thrust and 
thrust specific fuel consumption For a 
typical military turbofan at 11-km 
altitude. 
for thrust augmentation. The large increase in the ratio TAB/ T at the higher values of 
M00 in Fig. 3.28 is mainly due to the fact that T decreases at high Mach numbers. The 
dashed curve in Fig. 3.28 is the ratio of the thrust specific fuel consumption with and 
without afterburning CAB/c. The use of the afterburner causes a dramatic increase in 
the thrust specific fuel consumption well above that for the afterburner off. As M00 
increases, the ratio decreases, but it still remains substantially above unity. 
An international note: In the British aeronautical literature, afterburning is called 
reheat. 
The second miscellaneous comment in this section has to do with specific fuel 
consumption, which we have already seen may be couched in terms of thrust or 
power depending on the type, of engine. Sometimes, in comparing the performance 
of a variety of engines, it is useful to quote the specific fuel consumption uniformly 
in terms of one or the other. It is easy to transform the specific fuel consumption c, 
defined in terms of power, to the thrust specific fuel consumption c1, defined in terms 
of thrust, and vice versa, as follows. By definition, 
l.Vfuel [3.37] C=--p 
and 
l.Vfuel [3.38] c,=--T 

===== PDF PAGE 198 =====
C H A P T E R 3 e Some 
Combining Eqs. (3.37) and (3.38), we have 
cP 
C1=y [3.39] 
For the reciprocating engine/propeller combination, c is defined with P as the engine 
shaft power, as given by Eq. In turn, Pis related to the power available from 
the engine/propeller combination via Eq. as 
Moreover, 
PA P=-
1/pr 
=T 
Combining Eqs. (3.40) and (3.41), we have 
TVoo P=--
Substituting Eq. (3.42) into 
?/pr 
we obtain 
cV00 
Cr=-­
IJpr 
[3.40] 
[3.4 'I] 
[3.43] 
Equation (3.43) allows us to couch the specific fuel consumption for a reciprocating 
engine c in terms of an equivalent "thrust" specific fuel consumption c1 • The same 
relation can be used to couch the specific fuel consumption of a turboprop based on 
the equivalent shaft power Ces, defined by Eq. (3.35), in terms of an equivalent "thrust" 
specific fuel consumption c1 • 
SUMMARY 
The basic operation of various flight propulsion systems has been discussed in this 
chapter. In particular, the variations of thrust, power, and specific fuel consumption 
with flight velocity and altitude have been examined for each of these systems; this 
information is particularly relevant to the airplane performance and design concepts 
to be discussed in the remainder of this book. To help sort out these variations for 
different types of engines, a block diagram is shown in Fig. 3.29. Examine this 
block diagram carefully, and return to the pertinent sections of this chapter if you 
are not clear about any of the entries in the diagram. Please note that the velocity 
and altitude variations shown in Fig. 3.29 are approximate, first-order results, as 
explained throughout this chapter. They are useful for our purposes of estimating 
airplane performance and for the conceptual design of an airplane; they should not 
be taken too literally for any detailed analyses where more precise engine data are 
needed. 

===== PDF PAGE 199 =====
l 
Velocity variation 
l. Subsonic: Tis constant with 
2. Supersonic: ;I- = l + l.l8(M= - l) 
1 M=l 
Altitude variation 
1 TIT0 =rlr 0 
j Velocity variation ! 
. Ii 1. Subsonic: TSFC = 1.0 + kM= ! 
Specific fuel IH i 2. Supersonic: TSFC is constant I 
consumption I ' 
~-----J I l__j Aititude variation 
1 TSFC is constant with altitude 
I Power. ~ 
V~locity variation 
I l. High bypass ratio: TIT V=O = AM-:0" 
I 2. Low oypass ratio: Tfirst increases with M=, II 
I ,hen decreases at higher supersonic M= 
L__ 1~11 Turbofan 
engine ,__ __ __, y Altitude variation I 
II ' :iT0 = (r/r 0r J 
I Velocity variation l 
L_
I r----l I--, l. High bypass ratio: c, = B(l + kM=) I 
i Specific fuel LJ I 2. Low bypass ratio: c, gradually increases with velocity j 
I consumptwn / · 
Altitude variation 
c, is constant with altitude 
I ~ 1 I Velocity variation 
i~ . np· .,._M, 
I, I PA"' + 'f;JV= I Ii . A 1s constant w~ 
,--1 PA= h Ps _, T · V H1 r:-:-:-Al. . . . I 
IT '-- ~ I ·,· pr · J 00 
1 . ! t1tuoe vanat10n . , llfovPfOD I , D - 1 p lJ ------
'-1 engi~~ ---ii L~ "1 pr- es _J ! PA/PA,O = I 
I Velocitv variation I 
I U' ,t CA rn c~-nstant wit'! V OO I 
Specifi,; fuel 
! consumption l i A_lt1tu1~ va.i_-:3t10'1 I 
L..__ __ l L_-! c 1 1& constant witti altitude 
_J 
Block ivmmary. 

===== PDF PAGE 200 =====
CHAPTER 
High-bypass-ratio turbofan 
Turboprop 
Reciprocating er;gine,/propeHer 
0.5 
3.30 
.0 
Design Mac;-i number 
fAach number 
power 
2.0 
ai:1pJl1cat1o;ns in different pa..4:s of the Mach number spectrum. 
are summarized in the bar chart in 
3.30 above. 
Hence vve inove on 
Part 2, which deals with such 
The General Electric J79 a thrust of 10~000 lb at sea leveL The inlet 
at standard ~;ea level 
and 
sea level. 
• =""VA', of 220 f'ris at sea leveL itt 
tot.he is l.700 his. 
Hl7 

===== PDF PAGE 201 =====
P .A R T 1 G Preliminary Considerations 
exit pressure is to the ambient pressure. Calculate the area of the inlet to the 
engine necessary to obtain this thmst. 
3.4 A turbofan engine on a test stand in the operates at a thmst 
level lb with a thrust fuel consumption of0.5 . The fuel reservoir 
feeding the engine holds of jet fuel. If the reservoir is full at the beginning 
of the test, how long can the run before the fuel reservoir is empty? Note: A 
gallon of fuel 6.7 lb. 
3.5 The thrust of a turbofan engine decreases as the flight velocity increases. The maxi­
mum th..'Ust of the Rolls-Royce RB21 l turbofan at zero velocity at sea level is 
lb. Calculate the thrust at an altitude of 3 km at Mach 0.6. 
3.6 The Allison T56 turboprop engine is rated at equivalent shaft horsepower at 
zero velocity at sea level. Consider an airplane with this engine at 500 ft/s at 
sea level. The jet thrust is 250 and the efficiency is 0.9. Calculate the 
equivalent shaft horsepower at this flight condition. 
3.7 The specific fuel consumption for the Teledyne Continental Voyager 200 liquid-cooled 
reciprocating engine is 0.375 When installed in an airplane which is flying 
at 200 milh with a propeller efficiency of calculate the thrust specific 
fuel consumption. 

===== PDF PAGE 202 =====
PART 
AIRPLANE PERFORMANCE 
An airplane in motion through the atmosphere is responding to the "four forces 
of flight"-lift, drag, thrust, and weight. Just how it responds to these four forces 
determines how fast it flies, how high it can go, how far it can fly, and so forth. These 
are some of the elements of the study of airplane performance, a sub-speciality under 
the general discipline offlight mechanics (or flight dynamics). Airplane performance 
is the subject of Part 2 of this book. Here we will use our knowledge of the lift, 
drag, and thrust of an airplane, as discussed in Part l, to analyze how a given airplane 
responds to the four forces of flight, and how this response determines its performance. 
In some respects, such a study helps to reinforce an appreciation for the "magic" of 
flight, and helps us to better understand the "mystery" of the flying machine. 
189 

===== PDF PAGE 203 =====
190 

===== PDF PAGE 204 =====
The Equations of Motion 
The power of knowledge, put it to the task, 
No barrier wiil be able to hold you back, 
It will support you even in flight! 
It cannot be your Creator's desire 
To chain his finest in the muck and the mire, 
To eternally deny you flight! 
4. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Poem by Otto Lilienthal, 1889. 
The last lines of this poem are engraved 
into a commemorative stone which 
marks the site of Lilienthal's fatal crash 
at Gollenberg, near Stolln, Germany 
In Part l we have discussed some preliminary considerations-aspects of aeronautical 
engineering historJ, applied aerodynamics, and the generation of propulsive thrust 
and power-all intended to provide the background against which we will examine 
the major subjects ofthis book, namely, airplane performance and design. We are now 
ready to move into the first of these subjects-airplane performance. Here we are not 
concerned about the details of aerodynamics or propulsion; rather, we make use of 
aerodynrunics mainly through the drag polar for a given airplane, and we consider the 
propulsive device simply in terms of thrust ( or power) available and the specific fuel 
consumption. Our major concern is with the movement of a given airplane through 
the atmosphere, insofar as it is responding to the four forces of flight. This movement 
is governed by a set of equations called the equations of motion, which is the subject 
of this chapter. 
191 

===== PDF PAGE 205 =====
192 
Figure 4.1 
L 
w 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
4.2 THE FOUR FORCES OF FLIGHT 
The four forces of flight-lift, drag, weight, and thrust, denoted by L, D, W, and T, 
respectively-are sketched in Fig. 4.1 for an airplane in level flight. The free-stream 
velocity V 00 is always in the direction of the local flight of the airplane; in Fig. 4.1 
the flight path is horizontal, and hence V 00 is also along the horizontal. The airplane 
is moving from left to right, hence V 00 is drawn pointing toward the left since it is 
a flow velocity relative to the airplane. By definition, the airplane lift and drag are 
perpendicular and parallel, respectively, to V00 , as shown in Fig. 4.1. Lift and drag 
are aerodynamic forces; in Fig. 4.1, L and D represent the lift and drag, respectively, 
of the complete airplane, including the wing, tail, fuselage, etc. The weight always 
acts toward the center of the earth; for the level-flight case shown in Fig. 4.1, W is 
perpendicular to V 00 • The thrust is produced by whatever flight propulsion device is 
powering the airplane. In general, T is not necessarily in the free-stream direction; 
this is shown in Fig. 4.1 where T is drawn at an angle E relative to the flight path. For 
the level-flight case shown in Fig. 4.1, all four forces are in the same plane, namely, 
the plane of the paper. This is also the longitudinal plane of symmetry for the airplane; 
the plane of symmetry splits the airplane into two symmetric halves. 
The completely level-flight case shown in Fig. 4.1 is by far the simplest orien­
tation of the airplane to analyze. Consider next the case of the airplane climbing ( or 
descending) along a flight path that is angled to the horizontal, as shown in Fig. 4.2. In 
general, the flight path is curved, as shown. Let us consider the case where the curve 
L 
w u \ 
Earth's surface 
Curved 
flight 
path 
Four forces of Right-lift, drag, thrust, and 
weight. Illustration shows the case of a 
horizontal Right path. Nole: For ordinary 
Right, lift and weight are much larger than 
thrust and drag; that is, for typical airplanes, 
LID"'" 10 to 15. 
Figure 4.2 Climbing Right. 

===== PDF PAGE 206 =====
C H A P T E R 4 • The Equations of Motion 
of the flight path lies entirely in the plane of the page, that is, in the vertical plane 
perpendicular to the earth's surface. At any given instant as the airplane moves along 
this path, the local, instantaneous angle of the flight path, relative to the horizontal, 
is e. Hence V 00 is inclined at angle e, which is called the local climb angle of the 
airplane. As before, Land Dare perpendicular and parallel to V00 • Weight W, acts 
toward the center of the earth, and hence is perpendicular to the earth's surface. For 
the airplane in climbing flight, the direction of W is inclined at the angle e relative to 
the lift, as shown in Fig. 4.2. The vertical plane (page of the paper) is still the plane 
of symmetry for the airplane. 
Starting with the airplane in the orientation shown in Fig. 4.2, we now rotate it 
about the longitudinal axis-the axis along the fuselage from the nose to the tail. That 
is, let us roll (or bank) the airplane through the roll angle </J shown in Fig. 4.3. This 
figure shows a more general orientation of the airplane in three-dimensional space, 
at an instantaneous climb angle of e and an instantaneous roll angle¢. Examine Fig. 
4.3 closely. The side view shows, in perspective, the airplane rolled toward you, the 
reader. Hence, the page is no longer the symmetry plane of the aircraft. Instead, the 
plane of symmetry is as shown in the head-on front view at the right in Fig. 4.3. This 
front view is a projection of the airplane and the forces on plane AA taken perpen­
dicular to the local free-stream velocity V00 • In this head-on front view, the plane of 
symmetry of the airplane is inclined to the local vertical through the roll angle </J. 
Fi9.ure 4.3 
w 
viewer through 
the angle f. 
Earth's surface 
A 
~ 
~ 
% 
~ 
Section AA 
Head-on front view 
Airplane in climbing Right and rolled through angle tf>. 
tI'l 0. 
(JQ 
(1) 
<: ;;;· 
~ 
0 .... 
5' 
(1) 
<: 
(1) 
::. n· 
E. 
"g. ., 
::, 
(1) 
193 

===== PDF PAGE 207 =====
PART 2 @ Perfom1ance 
Now consider the four forces of as appear in Fig. 4.3. In the side 
view, the lift is shown, in rotated away from the local vertical through 
the angle that the lift is indined to the page at the roll In the head-on 
front view, the lift L is clearly shown inclined to the vertical at angle The thrust 
T, which is inclined to the direction the E, is also rotated 
out of the of the page in the side view. In the head-on front view, T nn·11e,rt~ 
the component T sin E; this component is also rotated away from the vertical 
angle q;. The W is always directed downward in the local vertical direction. 
Hence, in the side view, W is in the of the page. In the head-on front view, 
the weight projects as the component W cos 8, directed downward along the vertical. 
Finally, in the side view, the drag which is parallel to the local relative 1s m 
the plane of the page. In the head-on view, since D is parallel to the drag does 
not appear; its component projected on AA is zero. 
4.3 EQUATIONS 
The equations of motion for an 
law, namely, 
are statements of Newton's second 
F=ma 
Equation 1) is a vector equation, where the force F and the acceleration a are vector 
quantities. However, 
Eq. l) can also be written in scalar form in terms of scalar 
components of F and a. For if we choose an direction in space, 
denoted by s, and we let Fs and as be the components of F and a, in the 
s direction, then Eq. l) gives 
Fs = mas 
At this stage in our we have two choices. We could choose to develop 
the equations of motion in a very general, formalistic manner, dealing with a 
spherical ea.-th and taking into account the acceleration of with distance from 
the center of the earth. Such a can be found in intermediate or advanced 
books on dynamics. A nice discussion of the general equations of motion is given 
Vinh in Ref. 45. Our other choice is to assume a flat, stationary earth and to ""'''-"J.vu 
the equations of motion from a less formalistic, more physically motivated 
view. Since the flat-earth are all we need for the and since 
our purpose is not to cover general 
dynamics, we make the latter choice. 
Return to 4.3, and visualize the motion of the its curved 
path in three-dimensional space. Since we are interested in the translational motion 
of the airplane only, let us the in Fig. 43 with a mass at its center 
of gravity, with the four forces of through this point, as sketched in Fig. 
4.4. The sketch in Fig. 4.4 is drawn so that the of the page is the 
the local free-stream V 00 and the local verticaL Hence, in both 
D and W are in the plane of the page. The of lift in this plane is L cos 

===== PDF PAGE 208 =====
The thrust is represented its components in this plane, T cos E and T sin E cos 
parallel and perpendicular, respectively, to the local free-stream velocity V 00 • 
The curvilinear motion of the airplane along the curved flight path, projected 
into the plane of 4.4, can be expressed by Newton's second by first taking 
components parallel to the flight path and then taking components perpendicular to 
the The component of force parallel to the flight path is, from Fig. 4.4, 
= T cos E - D - W sin a 
The acceleration parallel to the path is 
dVoo 
a ii = ------;fr 
Hence, Newton's second 
or 
taken parallel to the flight path, is 
ma11 = F11 
dV 
m__.'.:: = T COSE - D - w sine dt 
In the direction perpendicular to the flight path, the component of force is 
D 
+ 
\ \ 
,\~ 
I \L cos f 
I I 
\ 
i \ 
r-;1 
i \ W4 \ 
' \ 
Center of gravity, e.g., 
for the airplane 
Forces proiected into !he plane formed 
free-stream V x and the vertical !oe•mB,ndi,:ulo 
surface of the 
to the 
[4.4] 
[4.5] 

===== PDF PAGE 209 =====
196 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
FJ_ = Leos</>+ TsinEcos<f>-Wcose 
The radial acceleration of the curvilinear motion, perpendicular to the flight path, is 
v2 
QJ_ = _2£ 
r1 
where r1 is the local radius of curvature of the flight path in the plane of the page in 
Fig. 4.4. Hence, Newton's second law, taken perpendicular to the flight path, is 
or 
maj_ = FJ_ 
v2 
m _2£ = L cos</> + T sin E cos</> - w cos e . 
r1 
[4.6] 
Return to Fig. 4.3, and visualize a horizontal plane-a plane parallel to the flat 
earth. The projection of the curved flight path on this horizontal plane is sketched in 
Fig. 4.5. The plane of the page in Fig. 4.5 is the horizontal plane. The instantaneous 
location of the airplane's cemer of gravity (e.g.) is shown as the large dot; the velocity 
vector of the airplane projects into this horizontal plane as the component V 00 cos e, 
tangent to the projected flight path at the e.g. location. The local radius of curvature of 
the flight path in the horizonatal plane is shown as r2. The projection of the lift vector 
in the horizontal plane is L sin </>, and is perpendicular to the flight path, as shown in 
Fig. 4.5. The components of the thrust vector in the horizontal plane are T sin E sin</> 
and T cos E cos e perpendicular and parallel, respectively, to the projected flight path 
in Fig. 4.5. The component of drag in this plane is D cos fJ. Since the weight acts 
perpendicular to the horizontal, its component is zero in Fig. 4.5. If you are not quite 
clear about the force components shown in Fig. 4.5, go back and reread this paragraph, 
Dcosu 
I Center of gravity for the airplane 
ITcose cosu V~cosu 
~ ,T,mero,~ 
Figure4.5 
L ,m f Projoctioo of 
J flight path 
rr2 
+ 
Forces projected into the horizontal plane parallel to the 
Rot earth. 

===== PDF PAGE 210 =====
C H A P T E R 4 ® The Equations of Motion 
flipping back and forth between Figs. 43 and 4.5, until you feel comfortable with the 
sketch shown in Fig. 4.5. 
Consider the force components in Fig. 4.5 that are perpendicular to the flight 
path at the instantaneous location of the center of gravity. The sum of these forces, 
denoted by F2 , is 
F2 = L sin¢+ T sinE sin¢ 
The instantaneous radial acceleration along the curvilinear path in Fig. 4.5 is 
(V00 cose) 2 
r2 
From Newton's second law taken along the direction perpendicular to the flight path 
in the horizontal plane shown in Fig. 4.5, we have 
CVoocos8)2 . 
m = L sin¢ + T sin E sm ¢ [4.7] 
r2 
Equations ( 4.5) to ( 4. 7) are three equations which describe the translational motion 
of an airplane through three-dimensional space over a flat earth .. They are called the 
equations of mution for the airplane. (There are three additional equations of motion 
that describe the rotational motion of the airplane about its axes; however, we are not 
concerned with the rotational motion here. Also, we have assumed no yaw of the 
airplane; the free-stream velocity vector has been treated as always parallel to the 
symmetry plane of the aircraft.) These equations of motion are simply statements of 
Newton's second law. 
4.4 SUMMARY AND COMMENTS 
In this short chapter we have discussed the four forces of flight-lift, drag, thrust, and 
weight. The translational motion of the airplane-its flight path and the instantaneous 
velocities and accelerations-is determined by these forces. The equations which 
relate the forces to the motion are obtained from Newton's second law. The resulting 
equations are called the equations of motion for the airplane. For the assumption of 
a flat earth and no yaw, the equations of motion are given by Eqs. (4.5) to (4.7). 
Our discussion of airplane performance for the remainder of Part 2 of this book 
is based on various applications of the equations of motion. We will find that, to 
answer some questions about the performance of an airplane, Eqs. (4.5) to (4.7) can 
be greatly simplified. However, to address other aspects of performance, Eqs. ( 4.5) 
to (4.7) need to be used in almost their full form. In any event, with the equations of 
motion in our mind, we are now ready to examine these performance questions. 
197 

===== PDF PAGE 211 =====


===== PDF PAGE 212 =====
Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
We have the aerodynamic knowledge, the structural materials, the power plants, and 
the manufacturing capacities to perform any conceivable miracle in aviation. But 
miracles must be planned, nurtured, and executed with intelligence and hard work. 
5. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Glenn L. Martin, aviation 
pioneer and manufacturer, 1954 
A three-view of the Gulfstream IV twin-turbofan executive transport is shown in 
Fig. 5 .1. This airplane is considered one of the most advanced executive jet transports 
in existence today. The first flight of the prototype took place on September 19, 1985. 
On June 12, 1987, a regular production model took off from le Bourget Airport in 
Paris (the same airport at which Charles Lindbergh touched down on May 21, 1927, 
at the end of his famous transatlantic solo flight); 45 hours 25 minutes later, the same 
Gulfstream IV landed at le Bourget, setting a new world record for a westbound 
around-the-world flight (with four 
refueling stops). This length of time to fly around 
the world was only 12 h longer than it took Lindbergh to fly the Atlantic in 1927. 
The Gulfstream IV has a normal cruising speed of 528 mi/h at an altitude of 45,000 
ft, which yields a cruising Mach number of 0.80. Its maximum range at cruising 
conditions with a maximum payload of 4,000 lb is 4,254 mi. The Gulfstream has a 
maximum rate of climb at sea level of 4,000 ft/min. Its stalling speed with flaps up is 
141 mi/h; with the flaps down, the stalling speed reduces to 124 mi/h. 
The facts and figures given above-are a partial description of the performance 
of the airplane. They pertain t6 the airplane in steady flight; that is, the airplane is 
experiencing no acceleration. Such performance for unaccelerated flight is called 
199 

===== PDF PAGE 213 =====
200 PART 2 ® 
Figure 5.1 Three-view of ihe Gulfstream Aerospace Gulfstream !V executive iel transport. 
static performance. In this chapter, we focus on aspects of the static performance of 
an airplane. 
How do we know the static performance characteristics of the Gulfstream IV 
itemized above? One answer is that they can be measured in flight after the airplane 
is designed and built. But how can we calculate and analyze the performance of the 
airplane before it first flies? Indeed, how can we estimate the performance of a given 
airplane design before the airplane is actually built? The purpose of this chapter is to 
answer these and other related questions. In this chapter we develop analytical and 
graphical techniques to predict the static performance of an airplane. We see how to 
obtain the type of performance figures discussed earlier for the Gulfstream and 
for any other type of conventional airplane as well. 
Parenthetical note: The worked examples sprinkled throughout this chapter deal 
with an airplane patterned after the Gulfstream IV. The Gulfstream IV is powered 
by turbofan engines, which, as we have discussed in Chapter 3, experience a de­
crease in thrust as the flight velocity increases. This is in contrast to typical turbojet 
engines which, for subsonic speeds, have a relatively constant thrust with velocity. 
Nevertheless, for a pedagogical reason, we assume in the present worked examples 
that the thrust from the jet engines remains constant with velocity, as opposed to the 
actual situation of decreasing thrust The pedagogical reason is this: in this 
we highlight both graphical and analytical solutions of airplane perfonnance .. In the 
worked examples, both graphical and analytical approaches are used, and the answers 
from both approaches are compared with one another. If the engine thrust is a func­
tion of velocity, the analytical solutions, although still possible, become much more 
cumbersome. From a pedagogical point of view,. making the analysis more cumber­
some detracts from the fundamental ideas being presented. Therefore, we avoid this 
situation by assuming in the worked examples a constant thrust from the jet engines. 

===== PDF PAGE 214 =====
C H A P T E R 5 @ Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Please be aware that in some cases this will lead to results that are much too optimistic. 
The actual Gulfstream IV is already a high-performance airplane (a "hot" airplane); 
in some of the worked exa..'11.ples in this chapter, it will appear to be even "hotter." 
However, the purpose of the worked examples is to illustrate the basic concepts, and 
so nothing is lost, and indeed much is gained, by the simplicity in assuming a constant 
thrust with velocity. Some of the problems at the end of this chapter deal with the 
more realistic case of a variation of turbofan thrust with velocity. The results of these 
problems, compared with the corresponding worked examples in the text, give some 
idea of the differences obtained. 
5.2 EQUATIONS OF MOTION FOR STEADY, LEVEL 
FLIGHT 
Return to Fig. 4.1, which shows an airplane with a horizontal flight path. This airplane 
is in level flight; that is, the climb angle e and roll angle ef; are zero. Moreover, by 
definition, steady flight is flight with no acceleration. Hence, the governing equations 
of motion for steady, level flight are obtained from Eqs. (4.5) and (4.6) by setting 
e, ¢, dV00 /dt, and V,;Jr 1 equal to zero. (The normal acceleration V00 /r 1 is zero by 
definition of steady flight, i.e., no acceleration; this is also consistent with the flight 
path being a straight line, where the radius of curvature r1 is infinitely large.) The 
resulting equations are, from Eq. (4.5), 
0 = TcosE - D [5.1J 
and from Eq. (4.6), 
0 = L + T sin E - W [5.2] 
Although the engine thrust line is inclined at angle E to the free-stream direction, 
this angle is usually small for conventional airplanes and can be neglected. Hence, 
for this chapter we assume that the thrust is aligned with the flight direction, that is, 
E = 0. For this case, Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2) reduce to, respectively, 
[i~ 
I L=W I 
[5.3] 
l.5.4] 
Equations (5.3) and (5.4) can be obtained simply by inspection of Fig. 5.2, which 
illustrates an airplane in steady, level flight. In the simple force balance shown in 
Fig. 5.2, lift equals weight [Eq. (5.4)] and thrust equals drag [Eq. (5.3)]. Although we 
could have written these equations directly by inspection of Fig. 5 .2 rather than derive 
them as special cases of the more general equations of motion, it is instructional to 
show that Eqs. (5.3) and (5.4) are indeed special cases of the general equations of 
motion-indeed, Eqs. (5.3) and (5.4) are the equations of motion for an airplane in 
steady, level flight. 

===== PDF PAGE 215 =====
202 P A R T 2 ® Airplane Performance 
w 
Figure 5.2 Force diagram for steady, level flight 
5.3 THRUST REQUIRED (DRAG) 
Return again to Fig. 5.2. Imagine this airplane in steady, level flight at a given velocity 
and altitude, say, at 400 mi/hat 20,000 ft. To maintain this speed and altitude, enough 
thrust must be generated to exactly overcome the drag and to keep the airplane going­
this is the thrust required to maintain these flight conditions. The thrust required TR 
depends on the velocity, the altitude, and the aerodynamic shape, size, and weight of 
the airplane-it is an airframe-associated feature rather than anything having to do 
with the engines themselves. Indeed, the thrust required is simply equal to the drag 
of the airplane~it is the thrust required to overcome the aerodynamic drag. 
A plot showing the variation of TR with free-stream velocity V 00 is called the 
thrust required curve; such a curve is shown in Fig. 5.3. It is one of the essential 
elements in the analysis of airplane performance. A thrust required curve, such as the 
one shown in Fig. 5.3, pertains to a given airplane at a given standard altitude. Keep 
in mind that the thrust required is simply the drag of the airplane, hence the thrust 
required cruve is nothing other ti-Jan a plot of drag versus velocity for a given airplane 
at a given altitude. The thrust required curve in Fig. 5.3 is for the Northrop T-38 jet 
trainer (shown in Fig. 2.42) with a weight of 10,000 lb at an altitude of 20,000 ft. 
Question: Why does the TR curve in Fig. 5.3 look the way it does? Note that at the 
higher velocities, TR increases with V 00 , which makes sense intuitively. However, at 
lower velocities, TR decreases with V00 , which at first thought is counterintuitive-it 
takes less thrust to fly faster? Indeed, there is some velocity at which TR is a minimum 
value. What is going on here? Why is the thrust required curve shaped this way? 
We will address these questions in the next two subsections. First we examine the 
purely graphical aspects of the thrust required curve, showing how to calculate points 
on this curve. Then we follow with a theoretical analysis of the thrust required curve 
and associated phenomena. 
5.3.1 Graphical Approach 
Consider a given airplane flying at a given altitude in steady, level flight. For the 
given airplane, we know the following physical characteristics: weight W, aspect 
ratio AR, and wing planfonn area S. Equally important, we know the drag polar for 

===== PDF PAGE 216 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
:~ 
I w = 10,000 lb I 
1 Alt. = 20,000 ft I 
o; 
I 
s 4 
X 
;9 
~ 
"O 3 
" .=: 
" er 
~ 
ti 
~ 
2 
I 
i 
0 200 400 600 800 l,000 
V =• ft/s 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 l.O 
M= 
figure 5.3 Thrust required c;urve for the Northrop T-38 jet trainer 
with a weight of 10,000 lb al an altitude of 20,000 ft. 
the airplane, given by Eq. (2.47), repeated here: 
Cv = Cv,o + KCf [5.5] 
where C v,o and K are known for the given airplane. To calculate the thrust required 
curve, proceed as follows: 
l. Choose a value of V 00 • 
2. For the chosen V 00 , calculate CL from the relation 
or 
L = W = !Poo V~SCi 
2W Ci=--­
Poo V~S 
3. Calculate Cv from Eq. (5.5), repeated here. 
CD= Cv,o + KCf 
203 

===== PDF PAGE 217 =====
204 
Example 5.1 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
4. Calculate drag, hence TR, from 
TR= D = !PooV~SCv 
This is the value of TR corresponding to the velocity chosen in step 1. This 
combination (TR, V00 ) is one point on the thrust required curve. 
5. Repeat steps 1 to 4 for a large number of different values of V00 , thus generating 
enough points to plot the thrust required curve. 
Consider the Gulfstream IV twin-turbofan executive transport shown in Fig, 5.1. Calculate 
and plot the thrust required curve at an altitude of 30,000 ft, assuming a weight of 73,000 lb. 
Airplane data: S = 950 ft2 , AR= 5.92, Co.o = 0.015, and K = 0.08. Hence the drag polar 
in the form given by Eq. (5.5) is 
Co= O.Ql5 + 0.08Cz 
Note: The above drag polar for the Gulfstream IV is only an educated guess by the author. 
Drag polar information for specific airplanes is sometimes difficult to find in the open literature 
because it is often proprietary to the manufacturer. The value of 0.015 chosen for C o,o is based 
on a generic value typical of streamlined, multiengine jet aircraft. The value of 0.08 chosen 
for K is estimated by first calculating k3 in Eq. (2.44), where k3 = 1/(rreAR). Assuming a 
span efficiency factor e = 0.9, we have 
I I k3 = -- = =0.06 rreAR rr(0.9)(5.92) 
In Eq. (2.44), assume k1 (associated with the increase in parasite drag due to lift) is about 
fk3• Also, assume no wave drag, hence in Eq:·(2.44); k2 = 0. Thus, K = k1 + k2 + k3 = 
0.02 + 0 + 0.06 == 0.08. Because of these assumptions, the drag polar used in this calculation 
is only an approximation for the Gulfstream IV, and hence the computed results (and any of 
the related results to follow) are only an approximate representation of the performance of the 
Gulfstream IV as opposed to a precisely accurate result for the real airplane. 
To calculate a point on the thrust required curve, let us follow the. four-step procedure 
described earlier. · 
1. Choose V 00 = 500 ft/s. 
2. At a standard altitude of 30,000 ft (see Appendix B), 
Poo = 8.9068 x 10-4 slug/ft3 
C = ~ = . . 2(73,000) = 0.6902 
L Poo VJ,S (8.9068 x 10-4 )(500) 2 (950) 
3. Co= Co,o + KCf = O.QI5 + 0.08(0.69)2 = 0.0531 
4. TR= D = ~Poo V~SCo = ~(8.9068 x 10-4 )(500) 2 (950)(0.053) = I 5,617 lb 
Hence, to maintain straight and level flight at a velocity of 500 ft/s at an altitude of 30,000 ft, 
the airplane requires 5 ,6 I 7 lb of thrust. The calculation of other points on the thrust required 
curve for other velocities is tabulated in Table 5.1. 

===== PDF PAGE 218 =====
CHAPTER 5 I!) Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Table 5. i 
V co (ft!s) CL CD TR (lb) 
300 l.9172 0.3090 l l,768 
400 l.0784 0.1080 7,313 
500 0.6902 0.0531 5,617 
600 0.4793 0.0334 5,084 
700 0.3521 0.0249 5,166 
800 0.2696 0.0208 5,636 
900 0.2130 0.0186 6,384 
1,000 0.1725 0.0174 7,354 
!,JOO 0.1426 0.0166 8,512 
1,200 0.1198 0.0161 9,838 
l,300 0.1021 0.0158 1 l,321 
The results are plotted in Fig. 5.4 as the solid curve. 
Let us examine the trends shown in Table 5.1 and in Fig. 5.4. Keep in mind that 
the drag polar for this graph, namely CD = 0.015 + 0.08Cz, does not account for 
the rapid 
drag divergence due to wave drag that would occur at a free-stream Mach 
number of about 0.85 (the maximum operating Mach number of the Gulfstream IV 
is 0.88, as listed in Ref. 36). Hence the portion of the T8 curve shown in Fig. 5.4 
for M 00 > 0.85 is more academic than real. However, this does not compromise the 
important points discussed below. 
First, note the variation of CL with V 00 as tabulated in Table 5. l. At the lowest 
values of V 00 , CL is very large; but as V 00 increases, CL decreases fairly rapidly. This 
is because for steady, level flight L = W and 
L = W = !Poo V~SCc 
At very low velocity, the necessary lift is generated by flying at a high lift coefficient, 
hence 
at a high angle of attack. However, as V 00 increases, a progressively lower CL 
is required to sustain the weight of the airplane because the necessary lift is gener­
ated progressively more by the increasing dynamic pressure !Poo V~. Hence, as V00 
increases, the angle of attack of the airplane progressively decreases, as sketched in 
Fig. 5.4. 
With the above ideas in mind, we can now explain why the thrust required curve is 
shaped as it is-with TR first decreasing with increasing velocity, reaching a minimum 
value, and then increasing as velocity further increases. To help us in this explanation, 
we write the drag as 
205 

===== PDF PAGE 219 =====
206 
12~ 
JO 
'7 8 
0 
X 
= 
f...'"' 
"Cl 6 I:! 
I 
L~ 
2 
0 
0 
Figure 5.4 
P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
200 
0.2 
! 
Rapidly increasing I 
drag due to lift : 
as V ~ decreases 
Region 
of velocity 
instability 
Rapidly increasing 
zero-!ifl drag 
as V ~ increases 
Region 
of velocity 
stability 
Decreasing angle of attack 
400 800 l,000 
0.4 0.6 0.8 l.O 
1,200 
l.2 
Thrust required curve for the Gulfstream IV al !he conditions for Example 5.1, illustrating 
the regions of velocity instobili!y and stability, and the direction of decreasing angle of 
attack with increasing velocity. Altilude = 30,000 fl; W = 73,000 lb. 
where 
CD= CD,O + KCz 
Hence 
D = !Poo V~SCD + !Poo V!SKCz 
Zero-lift drag drag due to lift 

===== PDF PAGE 220 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
At low velocity, where CL is high, the total drag is dominated by the drag due to lift. 
Since the drag due to lift is proportional to the square of CL, as seen in Eq. (5.6), 
and CL decreases rapidly as V 00 increases, the drag due to lift rapidly decreases, in 
spite of the fact that the dynamic pressure !Poo V! is increasing. This is why the TR 
curve first decreases as V 00 increases. This part of the curve is shown to the left of 
the vertical dashed line in Fig. 5.4-the region where the drag due to lift increases 
rapidly as V00 decreases. In contrast, as seen in Eq. (5.6), the zero-lift drag increases 
as the square of V 00 • At high velocity, the total drag is dominated by the zero-lift drag. 
Hence, as the velocity of the airplane increases, there is some velocity at which the 
increasing zero-lift drag exactly compensates for the decreasing drag due to lift; this 
is the velocity at which TR is a minimum. At higher velocities, the rapidly increasing 
zero-lift drag causes TR to increase with increasing velocity-this is the part of the 
curve shown to the right of the vertical dashed line in Fig. 5.4. These are the reasons 
why the TR curve is shaped as it is-with TR first decreasing with V 00 , passing through 
a minimum value, anq then increasing with V 00 • 
To reinforce the above discussion, Fig. 5.5 shows the individual variations of drag 
due to lift and zero-lift drag as functions of V00 • Note that at the point of minimum 
TR, the drag due to lift and the zero-lift drag are equal. From Eq. (5.6), this requires 
that Cv,o = KCz. We will prove this result analytically in Section 5.4.1. 
12 
I 
10 I 
I 
I 
I / 
I I 
I I 
8 I I 
I I 
"' I I 
I I 
8 I I 
X I I 
:9 6 \ I 
I 
& 
\ I 
\ I 
\ I 
Ci Drag due to lift ~\ 
I Zero-lift drag 
A 4 
2 
0 
Figure 5.5 
\ I 
\ I 
' 
/ 
' 
/ 
' / 
/ 
'>-, 
/ ' 
/ ' / ' / ' / .... .,,,..,,,, ............ _ _ ,.,,,.. -------
200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 
VelocityV_, ft/s 
Drag versus velocity For the Gulfstream IV For the conditions of 
Example 5. 1 . Illustration of the variation of the drag due to lift 
and the zero-lift drag. Altitude= 30,000 ft; W = 73,000 lb. 
207 

===== PDF PAGE 221 =====
208 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
It is undesirable to fly an airplane in the velocity range to the left of the vertical 
dashed line in Fig. 5.4. This is a region of velocity instability, as identified in Fig. 5.4. 
The nature of this velocity instability is as follows. Consider an airplane in steady, 
level flight at a velocity less than the velocity for minimum TR, that is, to the left of 
the vertical dashed line in Fig. 5.4. This condition is sketched in Fig. 5.6a, where the 
airplane velocity is denoted by Vi. For steady flight, the engine throttle is adjusted 
such that the thrust from the engine exactly equals TR. Now assume the airplane is 
perturbed in some fashion, say, by a horizontal gust, which momentarily decreases 
V00 for the airplane, say, to velocity Vz. This decrease in velocity ~ V = V2 - V1 
causes an increase in TR (an increase in drag), denoted by ~TR = TR, - TR1 • But 
the engine throttle has not been touched, and momentarily the drag of the airplane 
is higher than the thrust from the engine. This further slows down the airplane and 
takes it even farther away from its original point, point I in Fig. 5.6a. This is an 
unstable condition. Similarly, if the perturbation momentarily increases V00 to V3 , 
where the increase in velocity is ~ V = Vi - V1, then TR (hence, drag) decreases, 
~TR = TR3 - TR1 • Again, the engine throttle has not been touched, and momentarily 
the thrust from the engine is higher than the drag of the airplane. This accelerates 
the airplane to an even higher velocity, taking it even farther away from its original 
point, point 1. Again, this is an unstable condition. This is why the region to the left 
of the vertical dashed line in Fig. 5.4 is a region of velocity instability. 
The opposite occurs at velocities higher than that for minimum TR, that is, to 
the right of the dashed vertical line in Fig. 5.4. As shown in Fig. 5.6b, a momentary 
increase in velocity~ V = V2 - Vi causes a momentary increase in TR (hence drag). 
Since the throttle is not touched, momentarily the drag will be higher than the engine 
thrust, and the airplane will slow. down; that is, it will tend to return back to its 
original point 1. This is a stable condition. Similarly, a momentary decrease in 
velocity~ V = V3 - Vi causes a momentary decrease in TR (hence, drag). Since the 
throttle is not touched, momentarily the drag will be less than the engine thrust, and 
the airplane will speed up; that is, it will tend to return to its original point 1. Again, 
this is a stable condition. This is why the region to the right of the vertical dashed 
line in Fig. 5.4 is a region of velocity stability. 
5.3.2 Analytical Approach 
In this section we examine the thrust required curve from an analytical point of 
view, exploring the equations and looking for interesting relationships between the 
important parameters that dictate thrust required (drag). 
For steady, level flight we have from Eqs. (5.3) and (5.4) 
D D 
TR= D =WW= L w 
or 
[5.7] 

===== PDF PAGE 222 =====
7' 
'R 
Vi 
CHAPTER 5 
(a) 
TR I 
\ 
I 
t (T,)~" ) ---
voo Vi voo 
(b) 
2 
V(LID)max voo 
(c) 
Figure 5.6 (a) The mechanism of velocity instabilify. (b) The mechanism of velocily stability. (c) Maximum TR occurs at 
maximum lift-to-drag ratio, point 2. Points 1, 2, and 3 correspond lo points 1, 2, and 3, respectively, in Fig. 5.7. 
Examining Eq. (5.7), we see that for an airplane with fixed weight, TR decreases as 
L/ D increases. Indeed, minimum TR occurs when L/ D is maximum. This fact is 
noted on the lh1ust required curve sketched in Fig. 5.6c. The lift-to-drag ratio is one of 
the most important parameters affecting airplane peiformance. It is a direct measure 
of the aerodynamic efficiency of an airplane. The lift-to-drag ratio is the same as the 
ratio of CL to Cv, 
L 
= D 
!Poo V~SCL 
!Poo V~SCv 
[5.8] 
Since CL and CD aie both functions of the angle of attack of the airplane a, then 
L / D itself is a function of a. A generic variation of L / D with ot for a given airplane 
is sketched in Fig. 5.7. Comparing the generic curves in both 
Figs. 5.6c and 5.7, we 
see that point 2 in both figures corresponds to the maximum value of L / D, denoted 
( L / D )max. The angle of attack of the airplane at this condition is denoted as O:(L/ D),m. 
The flight velocity at this condition is denoted by V(L/ Dlrnax, which of course is the 
velocity at which TR is a minimum. Imagine an airplane in steady, level flight at a 

===== PDF PAGE 223 =====
210 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
L 
I5 
Figure 5.7 
2 
a 
Schematic of the variation of lift-to-drag ratio 
for a given airplane as a function of angle of 
attack. Points 1, 3, and 3 correspond to points 
1, 2, and 3, respectively, in Fig. 5.6c. 
given altitude, with its thrust required curve given by the generic curve in Fig. 5.6c. 
If its velocity is high, say, given by point 3 in Fig. 5 .6c, then its angle of attack is low, 
denoted by point 3 in Fig. 5.7. As seen in fig. 5.7, this condition is far away from that 
for maximum L / D. As the airplane slows down, we move from right to left along the 
TR curve in Fig. 5.6c and from left to right along the L/ D curve in Fig. 5.7. As the 
airplane slows down, its angle of attack increases. Starting at point 3 in Fig. 5.7, L/ D 
first increases, reaches a maximum (point 2), and then decreases. From Eq. (5.7), 
TR correspondly first decreases, reaches a minimum (point 2 in Fig. 5.6c), and then 
increases. Point 1 in Figs. 5.6c and 5.7 corresponds to a low velocity, with a large 
angle of attack and with a value of L / D far away from its maximum value. When you 
are looking at TR curve, it is useful to remember that each different point on the curve 
corresponds to a different angle of attack and a different L / D. To be more specific, 
consider the airplane in Example 5.1, with the corresponding data in Table 5.1. The 
variation of L / D with V 00 can easily be found by dividing CL by CD, both found 
in Table 5.1. The results are plotted in Fig. 5.8, where the values of (L/ D)max and 
V(L/ D)max are also marked. 
The drag (hence TR) for a given airplane in steady, level flight is a function of 
altitude (denoted by h), velocity, and weight: 
D = f (h, Voo, W) [5.9) 
This m.akes sense. When the altitude h changes, so does density p00 ; hence D 
changes. Clearly, as V00 changes, D changes. As W changes, so does the lift L; in 
turn, the induced drag (drag due to lift) changes, and hence the total drag changes. It 
is sometimes comfortable and useful to realize that drag for a given airplane depends 

===== PDF PAGE 224 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
16 
14 
I:) 12 ..... 
...;i 
0 'l:l 
e 
f 
B 10 
¢: 
J 
8 
6 
0 
Figure 5.8 
200 400 600 800 1,000 
Velocity V~, ft/s 
Variation of L/ D with velocity for the Gulfstream IV at 
the conditions For Example 5.1. Altitude= 30,000 ft; 
W = 73,000 lb. 
only on altitude, velocity, and weight. An expression for drag which explicitly shows 
this relationship is easily obtained from the drag polar: 
From Eq. (5.4), 
we have 
2W 
cl= v2 s Poo oo 
Substituting Eq. (5.11) into (5.10), we obtain 
D = ~Poo v!s [ Cv.o + 4K (Poo ~~S) 
2
] 
[5.10] 
[5.11] 
211 

===== PDF PAGE 225 =====
P A R T 2 $ Airplane Performance 
or 
2] 
For a given airplane (with given S, CD,O, and K), Eq. (5.12) explicitly shows t11e 
variation of drag with altitude (via the value of p00 ), velocity and weight W. 
Equation (5.12) can be used to find the flight velocities for a given value of TR, 
Writing Eq. (5.12) in terms of the dynamic pressure q00 = ! p00 V! and noting that 
D = TR, we obtain 
KS (W\2 
TR= qooSCD,0 + - - J qoo S / 
Multiplying Eq. (5.13) by q00 , and rearranging, we have 
(w)2 
+KS - =0 s) 
[5.13] 
[5.14] 
Note that, being a quadratic equation in q00 , Eq. (5.14) yields two roots, that is, two 
solutions for q00 • Solving Eq. (5.14) for q00 by using the quadratic formula results in 
qoo = 
TR± jT; - 4SCD,oK(W/S) 2 
2SCD,O 
2Cn,o 
By replacing q00 with 1Poo V~, Eq. (5.15) becomes 
2 TR/S ± j(TR/S) 2 - 4CD,oK(W/S) 2 
V = --~-'--~~~-~-----
00 PooCD,O 
[5.15] 
6] 
The parameter TR/ S appears in Eq. 16); analogous to the wing loading W / S, the 
quantity TR/Sis sometimes called the thrust loading. However, in the hierarchy of 
parameters important to airplane performance, TR/ S is not quite as fundamental as 
the wing loading W /Sor the thrust-to-weight ratio TR/ W (as will be discussed in the 
next section). Indeed, TR/Sis simply a combination of TR/Wand W / S via 
[5, 17] 
Substituting Eq. (5.17) into (5. 
expression for velocity: 
and taking the square root, we have our final 
V: _ r (TR/W)(W/S) ± (W/S)/(TR/W) 2 - 4Cn,0K=r 12 
J 
00 - l PooCD,O J I 
_J 

===== PDF PAGE 226 =====
C H A P T E R 5 ~ Airplane Performance: Steady 
Figure 5.9 
V(TR)min 
V(L/D)max 
At a TR larger than the minimum value, 
ihere ore !wo corresponding velocities, the low 
velocily V 2 and the high velocily V 1 . 
Equation (5.18) gives the two flight velocities associated with a given value of 
TR. For exa.tnple, as sketched in Fig. 5.9, for a given TR there are generally two 
flight velocities which correspond to this value of TR, namely, t.'1e higher velocity 
Vi obtained from t.lJe positive discriminant in (5.18) and the lower velocity V2 
obtained from the negative discriminant in Eq. (5. It is important to note the 
characteristics of the airplane on which these velocities depend. From Eq. (5.18), V 00 
for a given TR depends on 
1. Thrust-to-weight ratio TR/W 
2. Wing loading W / S 
3. The drag polar, that is, C D.o and K 
Of course, V 00 also depends on altitude via p00 • As we progress in our discussion, 
we will come to appreciate that TR/ W, and the drag polar are the fundamen­
tal parameters that dictate airplane performance. Indeed, these parameters will be 
highlighted in Section 5.4. 
When the discriminant in Eq. (5.18) equals zero, then only one solution for V00 
is obtained. This corresponds to point 3 in Fig. 5.9, namely, the point of minimum 
TR, That is, in Eq. (5.18) when 
[5.19] 
then the velocity obtained from Eq. 18) is 
= 

===== PDF PAGE 227 =====
214 P A R T 2 e Airplane Performance 
The value of (TR/ is given by Eq. as 
or 
= .j4Cn,oK [5.21] 
min 
Substituting Eg. (5.21) into Eq. (5.20), we have 
( \ l/2 
V: _ .j4Cn.oK W 
(TR)mm - C S) Poo D.O 
or 
[5,22] 
In Eq. (5.22), by stating that V(TR)m;, = , we are recalling that the velocity for 
minimum TR is also the velocity for maximum L/ D, as shown in Fig. 5.6. Indeed, 
since TR = D and L = W for steady, level flight, Eq. (5.21) can be written as 
( D) . = .j4Cn.oK 
L mm 
[5.23] 
Since the minimum value of D / L is the reciprocal of the maximum value of L / D, 
then Eq. (5.23) becomes 
Surveying the results associated with minimum TR (associated with point 3 on 
the curve in Fig. 5.9) as given by Eqs. (5.21), (5.22), and (5.24), we again see the role 
played by the parameters TR/ W, W / S, and the drag polar. From Eq. (5.21), we see 
that the value of (TR/ W)min depends only on the drag polar, that is, the values of C D.o 
and K. From Eq. (5.22), the velocity for (TR)min depends on the altitude (via p00 ), the 
drag polar (via CD,o and K), and the wing W / S. Notice in Eqs. (5.21) and 
(5.22) that the airplane weight does not appear separately, but rather always appears 
as part of a ratio, namely TR/ W and W / S. 
Looking more closely at Eqs. and (5.22), we see that the value of (TR)min 
is independent of altitude, but that the at which H occurs increases with 
increasing altitude (decreasing p00 ). This is sketched in Fig. 5.10. Also, 
the effect of increasing the zero-lift drag coefficient C v.o is to increase (TR )min and to 
decrease the velocity at which it occurs. The effect of increasing the ara1i:1:-<me-w-m 
factor K (say by decreasing the aspect ratio) is to increase (TR)min and increase the 

===== PDF PAGE 228 =====
CH APTER .5 • Airp)ane Performance: Steady Flight 
Figure 5.10 Effect of altitude on the point corresponding to 
minimum thrust required. 
velocity at which it occurs. If the airplane's weight is increased, (TR)min increases 
directly proportionally to W, given by Eq. (5.21), and the velocity at which it occurs 
increases as the square root of W, given by Eq. (5.22). 
The maximum lift-to-drag ratio, as given by Eq. (5.24), is solely dependent on 
the drag polar. An increase in the zero-lift drag coefficient C o,o and/or an increase in 
the drag-due-to-lift factor K decreases the value of the maximum lift-to-drag ratio, 
which certainly makes sense. Here is where the wing aspect ratio plays a strong role. 
A higher aspect ratio results in a lower value of K and hence increases the lift-to-drag 
ratio. 
For the Gulfstream Nat the conditions stated in Example 5.1, calculate the minimum thrust 
required and the velocity at which it occlirS. Compare the answers with the graphical results 
shown in Fig. 5.4. 
Solution 
From thedatagiveninExample5.1 we have W = 73,000lb, S = 950ft2, p00 = 8.9068 x 10-4 
slug/ft3, Co,o = 0.015, and K = 0.08. From Eq. (5.21), 
( TR) . = ../4C0 ,0K = ../4(0.015)(0.08) = 0.0693 
W mm 
Hei;ice, 
(TR)min = 0.0693W = 0.0693(73,000) = I 5,058 lb I 
The wing loading is 
W = 73,000 = 76 84 lb/ft2 
S 950 . 
Hence, the velocity for minimum TR is, from Eq. (5.22), 
v(TR)min = (p: {cf ~r/2 = [ 8.90682x 10-4/ ~~~(76.84)J/2 =I 631.2ft/~ I 
215 
Example 5.2 

===== PDF PAGE 229 =====
P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
On a graph of TR versus velocity, the above results state that the coordinates of the minimum 
point on the curve are (TR, V00 ) = (5,058 lb, 631.2 ft/s). Return to Fig. 5.4, and exawine the 
thrust required curve. The results calculated above agree with the graphical results obtained in 
Section 5.2 for the location of the minimum point in Fig. 5.4. 
5.3.J Graphical and Analytical Approaches: Some Comments 
For our study of thrust required, we have employed both a graphical <>n,,,.n,,rh , ~·-~"'~" 
5.3.1) and an analytical approach (Section 5.3.2). These two approaches complement 
each other. The graphical approach gives the global picture-an instantaneous visual­
ization of how vaxious characteristics vary over a range say, velocity. For example, 
Fig. 5.4 shows a complete TR curve; we see at a glance how TR varies with velocity, 
and in particular that a minimum point exists. In Fig. 5.5, we immediately see why 
the TR curve in Fig. 5.4 is shaped the way it is-it is a sum of two components, one 
rapidly decreasing with V 00 and the other rapidly increasing with V 00 • Also, it is 
instructive to be able to read from these curves the magnitudes of the vai.iables. In 
subsequent sections we will illustrate yet another advantage of dealing with graphs for 
airplane performance, namely, the use of geometric constructions (such as drawing 
a line from the origin, tangent to the TR curve) to identify certain specific aspects of 
airplane performance. For these reasons, we continue to use the graphical approach 
in our subsequent discussions. 
The great advantage of the analytical approach is that it clearly delineates the fun­
damental parameters of the problem. For example, in Section 5 .3 .2 we have shown that 
most of the equations involve the thrust-to-weight ratio TR/ W, the wing loading W / S, 
the drag polar via Cn,o and K, and the lift-to-drag ratio L/ D. We discuss further the 
importance of these parameters in the next section. In contrast, the graphical approach, 
dealing mainly with numbers rather than relationships, does not always identify the 
fundamental parameters. For example, in constructing the graph shown in Fig. 5.4, 
we know the results depend on weight W. However, only through the analysis do we 
find out the more fundamental fact that W usually appears only in the form TR/ W or 
W/S [see, e.g., Eqs. (5.18), (5.21), and (5.22)]. Also, how one quantity varies with 
another quantity is shown by the equations. For example, from Eq. (5.24) we know 
that (L/ D)max increases inversely proportionally to the square root of the zero-lift 
drag coefficient CDo [see Eq. (5.24)]. For these reasons, we will continue to use the 
analytical approach (as well as the graphical approach) in our subsequent discussions. 
5.4 THE FUNDAMENTAL PARAMETERS: THRUST~ 
TO~WEIGHT RATIO, WING LOADING, DRAG 
POLAR, AND LIFT~ TO~DRAG RATIO 
In the equations derived in Section 5.3.2, the thrust required TR :.-arely appears itself; 
rather, it is usually found in combination with the weight TR/ W or the wing area 
Similarly, the weight does not occur in an isolated fashion in these 

===== PDF PAGE 230 =====
C H A P T E R 5 @ Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
it is always found in combination with the wing area W / S or the thrust-to-weight 
ratio TR/W. Moreover, the thrust loading TR/Scan always be replaced with TR/ W 
because 
Hence, the thrust-to-weight ratio and the wing loading are fundamental parameters 
for airplane peifonnance, rather than just the thrust by itself and the weight by itself. 
The equations in Section 5.3.2 also highlight the importance of C n,o and K, that 
is, the drag polar. These are the primary descriptors of the external aerodynamic 
properties of the airplane, and it stands to reason that they would appear prominently 
in the equations for airplane performance. 
For steady, level flight, the lift-to-drag ratio is simply the reciprocal of the thrust­
to-weight ratio: 
Steady, level flight 
Hence, for such a case, to discuss L/ D and TR/ W is somewhat redundant How­
ever, for accelerated flight (turning flight, takeoff, etc.) and climbing flight, TR/ W 
and L / D are different, and each one takes on its own significance. We have fre­
quently emphasized the importance of L/ D as a stand-alone indicator of aerody­
namic efficiency. Let us examine further the implication of this ratio for airplane 
performance. 
For the restricted case of a given airplane in steady, level flight, we have noted 
that the lift-to-drag ratio is a function of velocity; Fig. 5.8 is a plot of the variation of 
L/ D with V00 for the Gulfstream IV in Example 5.1. The results shown in Fig. 5.8 
are obtained directly from the tabulation and graphical approach described in Section 
5.3.1. However, an equation for the curve shown in Fig. 5.8 is easily obtained by 
dividing Eq. (5.12) by the weight. 
D 1 2 S 2K S (W)2 
W = 2PooV00 WCn,o + ~ W S Poo oo 
[5.25] 
Since L = W for steady, level flight, Eq. (5.25) can be written as 
D Poo V!Cv,o 2K W 
L 2(W/S) +p00 V~S 
or 
L PooV00 Cn,o 21f, W ( 
2 J_ )-! 
D = 2(W/S) + p00 V~ S [5.26] 
Equation (5.26) is the analytical equation for the curve shown in Fig. 5.8. Note 
in Eq. (5.26) that W and S do not appear separately, but in the form of the wing 
loading W / S. Once again we are reminded of the fundamental nature of the wing 
loading. 
2i7 

===== PDF PAGE 231 =====
2HI 
11.:xamp!e 5.3 
P A R T 2 111 Airplane Pelforrnance 
For the Gulfstream IV at the conditions given in Example 5.1, calculate the value of 
a velocity of 400 ft/s. Compare the calculated result with Fig. 5.8. 
Solmior. 
for 
From Example 5.1, W = 73,000 lb, S = 950 ft2, CD.o = 0.015, K = 0.08, and p00 = 
8.9068 x 10-4 slug/ft 3. The wing loading is 
W 73,000 - = -- = 76.84 lb/ft2 
S 950 
From Eq. (5.26) 
!::_ = (Poo V~CD,O __l!i_ W)-! 
D 2W/S + p00 V~ S 
_ [(8.9068 X 10-4 (400)2(0.015) 2(0.08)(76.84) r 1 
- 2(76.84) + (8.9068 X lQ- 4 )(400)2 J 
Examining Fig. 5.8, we see that the value calculated above for L/ D agrees with the value on 
the curve 
for V 00 = 400 ft/s. 
Consider the maximum value of L/ D; dearly, from Fig. 5.8 we see that L/ D 
goes through a maximum value (L/ D)max, and we know from Section 5.3.3 that 
this point corresponds to n,Jnimum TR. Indeed, examining Eq. (5.26), we might 
assume that the value of (L/D)max would depend on the drag polar (Co,o and K), 
the wing loading, and the altitude (via p00 ). However, we have already shown that 
(L/ D)max depends only on the drag polar, and not on the other parameters; this result 
is given by Eq. (5.24). On the other hand, the velocity at which maximum L/ Dis 
achieved does depend on altitude and wing loading, as shown in Eq. (5.22). Let us 
examine in a more general fashion these and other matters associated with maximum 
L/D. 
5.4.1 Aerodynamic Relations Associated with Maximum CLICv, 
c;!21Cn, and C1/21Cn 
Equation (5.24) for (L/ D)max was derived from a consideration of minimizing thrust 
required in steady, level flight. In reality, Eq. (5.24) is much more general, and 
the same result can be obtained by a simple consideration of the lift-to-drag ratio 
completely independent of any consideration of TR, as follows. T'ne lift-to-drag ratio 
is 
L CL CL =-=-----
D Co Cv,o + KCf 
[5.27] 

===== PDF PAGE 232 =====
C H A P T E R 5 @ Airplane Perform.a.rice: Steady Flight 
For maximum CL/CD, differentiate Eq. (5.27) with respect to 
equal to zero: 
ai.,d. set the result 
d(CL/Cv) Cv,o + KCz - CL(2KCL) ----= =0 
dCL (Cv,o + KCZ) 2 
Hence, 
Cv,o + KCi - 2KCi = 0 
or 
j Cv,o = KC1] [5,28] 
From Eq. (5.28), when L/ Dis a maximum value, the zero-lift drag equals the drag 
due to Furthermore, t.lle value of (L/ D)mn can be found by rewriting Eq. (5.28) 
as 
CL=~ [5.29] 
' K 
and inserting (5.28) and (5.29) into Eq. (5.27). [Keep in mind that since 
Eqs. (5.28) and (5.29) hold for the condition of maximum L/ D, then Eq. (5.27) 
with these insertions yields 
the value of maximum L/ D.] 
or 
jCD,o/K 
2CD,O 
This result is the same as that obtained in Eq. (5.24). However, the above derivation 
made no assumptions about steady, level flight, and no consideration was given to 
minimum TR, Equation (5.30) is independent of any such assumptions. It is a general 
result, having to do with the aerodynamics of the airplane via ti'J.e drag polar. It is the 
same result whether the airplane is in climbing flight, turning flight, etc. 
However, the velocity at which (L / D)max is achieved is dependent on such consid­
erations. This velocity will be different for climbing flight or turning flight compared 
to steady, level flight Let us obtain the velocity at which maximum L / D is attained 
in steady, level flight For this case, L = W, and hence 
[5,3i] 
\1\r'hen L/ Dis a maximum, Eq. (5.29) holds. Substituting Eq. (5.29) into Eq. (531), 
and denoting, as before, the velocity at which is a maximum by. V<L! D)m .. , we 
have 

===== PDF PAGE 233 =====
2:20 p· A R T 2 111 Airplane Performance 
or 
W 1 2 I 
5 = 2Poo v(L/Dlmax -v Cv,ol K [5.33] 
Solving Eq. (5.33) for the velocity, we obtain 
[5.34] 
Equation (5.34) is identical to the result shown in Eq. (5.22). However, Eq. (5.22) 
was obtained from a consideration of minimum TR whereas Eq. (5.34) was obtained 
strictly on the basis of the aerodynamic relationships that hold at maximum L/ D, 
completely separate from any consideration of thrust required. The only restriction 
on Eqs. (5.22) and (5.34) is that they hold only for straight and level flight 
The value of (L/ D)max and the flight velocity at which it is attained are important 
considerations in the analysis of range and endurance for a given airplane. Indeed, 
as we will show in Section 5.11, the maximum range for an airplane powered with a 
propeller/reciprocating engine combination is directly proportional to (L / D)max· The 
maximum endurance for a jet-propelled airplane is also proportional to (L/ D)max· 
These matters will be made clear in Section 5 .11. We mention them here to underscore 
the importance of the lift-to-drag ratio; L / D is clearly a measure of the aerodynamic 
efficiency of the airplane. 
There are other aerodynamic ratios that play a role in airplane performance. 
For example, in Section 5.11 we will show that maximum endurance for a pro­
peller/reciprocating engine airplane is proportional to the maximum value of cf12 /CD, 
and that the maximum range for a jet airplane is proportional to the maximum value of 
C Y2 /CD. Because of the importance of these ratios, let us examine the aerodynamic 
relations associated with each. 
First, consider (Cf 12 /Cn)max· By replacing Cn with the drag polar, this expres­
sion can be written as 
c3;2 
L 
Cv 
c312 
L 
cD.O + Kcz 
[5.35] 
To find the conditions that hold for a maximum value of cf12 /CO , differentiate 
Eq. (5.35) with respect to Ci, and set the result equal to zero. 
d ( Ci12 /Cn) (Cn,o + KCE) Oclf2)-Ci1\2KCL) 
------ -0 dCi - Cn,o + KCz -
~c c112 + ~KC 512 - 2KC 512 = 0 2 D,O L z L L 
or 
I Cv,o::::: ~KCz [5.36] 

===== PDF PAGE 234 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
From Eq. (5.36), when c;!2 / Cv is a maximum value, the zero~lift drag equals one­
third the drag due to lift. Furthermore, the value of ( Ci12 /CD )max can be· found by 
writing Eq. (5.36) as 
[5.37] 
and substituting Eqs. (5.36) and (5.37) into Eq. (5.35). [Keep in mind that since Eqs. 
(5.36) and (5.37) hold only for the condition of maximum Ci12 /CD, then Eq. (5.35) 
with these substitutions yields the value of maximum Ci12 /Cv.] 
( Ci12 ) = ( Ci12 ·) = (3Cv,o/K) 314 = _1_ (3Cv,o) 314 
Cv max Cv,o + KC'i max Cv,o + 3Cv,o 4Cv,o K 
or 
[5.38] 
Note that the maximum value of Ci12 / C v is a function only of the drag polar, that is, 
Cv,o andK. 
In straight and level, flight, where L = W, the velocity at which (ct/CD )max 
is achieved can be found as follows. 
[5.39] 
When Ci12 / C v is a maximum, Eq. (5.37) holds. Substituti~g Eq. (5.37) into (5.39), 
and denoting the velocity at which c;!2 /Cv is a maximum by V<cz'2ico)max' we have 
1 ;3Cv,o W = 2 Poo V<cz'2 /Co)...,. S ~ [5.40] 
Solving Eq. (5.40) for the velocity, we obtain 
[5.41] 
Comparing Eq. (5.41) with (5.22) for V(L/D)mu• we see that 
or 
[5.42] 
221 

===== PDF PAGE 235 =====
P A R i 2 $ Airplane Performance 
Note from Eq. (5.42) that when the airplane is flying at (Cf12 /CD)max, it is flying 
more slowly than when i.t is flying at (L/ D)ma,'t; indeed, it is flying at a velocity 0.76 
times that necessary for maximum L / D. 
Consider ( C 112 /CD )max. Analogous to the above derivation, we find that for the 
maximum value of C 112 /CD, 
CD,O = 3KCI [5.43] 
From Eq. {5.43), when c? /CD is a maximum value, the zero-lift drag equals 3 times 
the drag due to lift. Furthermore, the value of (Ci12 /CD)max is given by 
c112 3 1 ( ) ( ) 
1/4 
JD max= 4 3KCb.o 
[5.44] 
The velocity at which (Ct /CD)max is achieved is 
[5.45] 
The derivation of Eqs. (5.43) to (5.45) is left to you as a homework problem. Com­
paring Eq. (5.45) with (5.22) for V(L/D)m .. • we see that 
or 
[5.46] 
Note from Eq. (5.46) that when the airplane is flying at (Ci12 /Co)mm it is flying 
faster than when it is flying at (L/ D)max; indeed, it is flying at a velocity 1.32 times 
that necessary for maximum L / D. 
For the Gulfstream IV in Example 5.1, the variations of c?2 /CD and ct /CD 
with velocity are easily obtained from the individual values of CL and CD tabulated 
in Table 5.1. The graphical results are shown in Fig. 5.11, along with the previous 
results for Ci/Cb (which is the same as L/ D). The various velocities at which 
cf12 /CD, Ci/CD, and ct /CD become maximum values are identified in Fig. 5.11. 
We can clearly see that 

===== PDF PAGE 236 =====
28 
26 
24 
22 
20 
tJ 
18 
f rJ 16 
c:i 
~ 14 
rJ 
J 12 
s; ..i 
I;.) 10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
Figure 5.11 
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i : 
'i;l I 
a ~I 
$; ..i I ~ i I.I I 
a ;::..-1 ;::..-
I ~ 
I t..i, 
I ::,.- I 
I I 
I I 
200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 
Velocity V ~· ft.ls 
Variation of cf 2 /CD, C tf Co, and Cf 2 /CD versus velocity for the 
Gulfstream Nat the conditions set in Example 5.1. Altitude = 30,000 ft, 
W = 73,000 lb. 
For the Gulfstream IV at the conditions given in Example 5.1, calculate the maximum values 
of Ci12 /Co, CL/Co, and c1f2 /Co, as well as the flight velocities at which they occur. 
Solution 
The maximum values of Ci12 /CO, CL/ C 0 , and C 112 /CO depend only on the drag polar, where 
C0 ,0 = 0.015 and K = 0.08. From Eq. (5.38), 
( ~r) max = ~ ( K :J{~ r
14 
= ~ [ (0.08)(i.Ol5) 113 r
4 
= ~ 
This value agrees with the graphical result shown in Fig. 5.11. The velocity at which this 
223 
Example 5.4 

===== PDF PAGE 237 =====
Example 5.5 
P A R T 2 ® Airplane Performance 
maximum occurs depends on the altitude and wing At an altitude of 30,000 ft, 
p00 = 8.9068 x 10-4 slug/ft 3• The wing loading is, from Example 5.2, = 76.84 lb/ft2. 
From Eq. (5.41) 
I 2 Mow\l/2 V 3/2 = I - -- -(C, /Co) ... _., \Poo 3Co,o s} 
IP 
= rl 2 . I 0·08 (76.84)1 = I 479.6 ft/s I 8.9068 x 10-4 V 3(0.015)· ~ ---~ 
' ..I 
This value agrees with ilie graphical result shown in Fig. 5.1 L 
From Eq. (5.30), 
(~)max = (~:)max = J 4C :.oK = 4(0.01;)(0.08) == B: 
This value agrees with the graphical result shown in Fig. 5.11 and Fig. 5.8. The velocity at 
which this maximum occurs is given by Eq. (5.34): 
VcL/D) = (~ /K w\)
112 
= [ 2 j o.os (76.84) ... j
112 
=I 631.2ft/s 
max Poo V c;;; S 8.9068 X 1Q-4 O.Q15 ~I ---~ 
This value agrees with the graphical result shown in Fig. 5.11 and Fig. 5.8. 
From Eq. (5.44), 
(c;12 ) 3 ( 1 ) 114 3'" 1 ] 114 ~ Cv max= 4 \ 3KCb.o = 4 l3(0.08)(0.015) 3 = L=.J 
This value agrees with the graphical result shown in Fig. 5 .11. The velocity at which this 
maximum occurs is given by Eq. (5.45): 
Vccl12 /Cv)max = ( p: {g: Y/
2 
- [ 2 j 3<0-0s) f76 84)] 
112 
-I s3o.s ft/s - 8.9068 X 10- 4 0.Ql5 ' . - ~--~ 
This value agrees with the graphical result shown in Fig. 5.11. 
It is interesting to note that the velocities at which the maximums of the various aerody­
namic ratios occur are in the ratio 
This is precisely the velocity relationships indicated by (5.42) and (5.46). 
For the Gulfstream IV at the conditions given in .5.1, calculate and compare the zero-
lift drag and the drag due to lift at (a) (Ct/Co)max, (b) (Cd Co)mo.x, and (Ci 12 / Cv)max· 
Solution 
(a) From Example 5.4, V(c2111c , = 479.6 ft/s. The dynamic pressure is 
l, Dhnro:. 
q00 = !Poo V! = !(8.9068 x 10-4)(479.6) 2 = 102.4 lb/ft 2 

===== PDF PAGE 238 =====
C H A P T E R 5 111 Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
The lift coefficient is, noting that L = W, 
W 73,000 
CL = qooS = (102.4)(950) = 0.7S04 
Zero-lift drag= q00 SCv.o = (102.4)(950)(0.015) = j 1,459.2 lb 
Drag due to lift= q00 SKCf = (102.4)(950)(0.08)(0.7504) 2 = I 4,382.3 lb 
Comparing, we get 
Zero-lift drag = 1,459.2 = 0_333 = fTl/ 
Drag due to lift 4,382.3 W 
This is precisely the prediction from Eq. (5.36), namely, that when c? /CD is a maximum, 
the zero-lift drag equals one-third of the drag due to lift. This result is further reinforced in 
Fig. 5.12, which contains some of the same plots as given in Fig. 5.5 but illustrates the drag 
comparisons at the maxima of the vaxious aerodynamic ratios. 
12 
10 
8 
"' I 
s 
X 
:e 6 
oii 
e Cl 
4 
2 
0 
Figura _5.12 
. R Zero-lift drag 
'" Drag due to lift 
200 8D9 l,000 l,200 
V<c1'21c0Jmox 
Com~rison of zero-lift drag ond drag due lo lifl for the 
Gulfstream IV a! the conditions sel in Example 5.1, 
emphasizing the relalion$hip$ between lhese drag values 
for the maxima in cf2 /Co, Ct/Co, and cl12 !Co. 

===== PDF PAGE 239 =====
!' A R T 2 o Airplane Performance 
(b) From Example 5.4, v(L/D)max = 631.2 f!ls. 
q00 = ! Poo V~ = i (8.9068 X 10-4)(631.2) 2 = l 77.4 lb/ft2 
W 73,000 
Ci = - = = 0.4332 qooS (l 77.4)(950) 
Zero-lift drag= q00 SCv.o = (177.4)(950)(0.015) = I 2,530 lb 
Drag due to lift= q00 SKCf = (177.4)(950)(0.08)(0.4332) 2 = I 2,530 lb I 
Note: Since this cakuation is being done on a hand calculator, both drag values have been 
rounded to three significant figures, for comparison. Thus 
Zero-lift drag _ 2,530 -[11 
Drag due to lift - 2,530 -
This is precisely the prediction from Eq. (5.28), namely, that when Cd CD is a maximum, the 
zero-lift drag equals the drag due to lift This result is further reinforced in Fig. 5.12. 
(c) From Example 5.4, v<cl/2 /CD)ma., = 830.8 ft/s. 
q00 = !Poo V;, = !(8.9068 x 10- 4 )(830.8) 2 = 307.4lb/ft 2 
W 73,000 
CL = qooS = (307.4)(950) = 0·2500 
Zero-lift drag= q00 SCv.o = (307.4)(950)(0.015) = I 4,380 lb 
Drag due to lift= q00 SKCz = (307.4)(950)(0.08)(0.25) 2 = 11,460 lb 
Comparing gives 
Zero-lift drag = 4,380 = r~ 
Drag due to lift 1,460 Li 
This is precisely the prediction from Eq. (5.43), namely, that when (Ci12 / Cv) is a maximum, 
the zero-lift drag is 3 times the drag due to lift. This result is further reinforced in 5.12. 
5.5 THRUST AVAILABLE AND THE MAXIMUM 
VELOCITY OF THE AIRPLANE 
By definition, the thrust available, denoted by TA, is the thrust the power 
plant of the airplane. The various propulsion devices are described at length in 
Chapter 3. The single purpose of these propulsion devices is to reliably and~ ••. ,~ .. , ..... " 
provide thrust in order to propel the aircraft. Return to the force diagrams shown in 
Figs. 4.1 to 4.3 and in Fig. 5.2; the thrust T shown in these diagrai"rl.s is what we are now 
labeling TA and calling thelhrust available. Unlike the thrust TR (discussed 
in Section 5.3), which has almost everything to do with the airframe the 

===== PDF PAGE 240 =====
C H A !' T E R 5 @ Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
weight) of the airplane and virtually nothing to do with the power plant, the thrust 
available TA has almost everything to do with t.he power plant and virtually nothing 
to do with the airframe. This statement is not completely t.'lle; there is always some 
aerodynamic interaction between the airframe and the power plant. The installation 
of the power plant relative to the airframe will set up an aerodynamic interaction that 
affects both the thrust produced by the power plant and the drag on th.e airframe. 
For conventional, low-speed airplanes, this interaction is usually small. However, 
for modern transonic and supersonic airplanes, it becomes more of a consideration. 
And for the hypersonic airplanes of the future, airframe and propulsion integration 
becomes a dominant design aspect However, for this chapter, we do not consider 
such interactions; instead, we consider TA to be completely associated with the flight 
propulsion device. 
5.5.1 P:ropeller~Driven Ai:rc:raft 
As described in Section 3.3.2, an aerodynamic force is generated on a propeller 
that is translating and rotating th..rough the air. The component of this force in the 
forward direction is the thrust of the propeller. For a propeller/~eciprocating engine 
combination, this propeller thmst is the thrust available TA. For a turboprop engine, 
the propeller thrust is augmented by the jet exhaust, albeit by only a small amount 
(typically almost 5%), as described in Section 3.6. The combined propeller thrust 
and jet thrust is the thrust available TA for the turboprop. 
The qualitative variation of TA with V 00 for propeller-driven aircraft is sketched in 
Fig. 5.13. The thrust is highest at zero velocity (called the static thrust) and decreases 
with an increase in V 00 • The thrust rapidly decreases as V 00 approaches sonic speed; 
this is because the propeller tips encounter compressibility problems at high speeds, 
including the formation of shock waves. It is for this reason (at least to the present) 
that propeller-driven aircraft have been limited to low to moderate subsonic speeds. 
The propeller is attached to a rotating shaft which delivers power from a recipro­
cating piston engine or a gas turbine (as in the case of the turboprop). For this reason, 
power is the more germane characteristic of such power plants rather than thrust For 
example, in Ref. 36 the Teledyne Continental 0-200-A four-cylinder piston engine 
is rated at 74.5 kW (or 100 hp) at sea level. Also in Ref. 36, the Allison T56-A-
14 turboprop is rated at 3,661 ekW (equivalent kilowatts), or 4,910 ehp (equivalent 
horsepower); the concept of equivalent shaft power (which includes the effect of the 
jet thrust) is discussed in Section 3.6. What is important here is that for the analysis 
of the performance of a propeller-driven airplane, power is more germane than thrust. 
Therefore, we defer our discussion of propeller power plants to Section 5.7, which 
deals with power available. 
However, should it be desired, the values of TA for a propeller-driven airplane 
can be readily obtained from t.11e power ratings as follows. The power available from 
a propeller/reciprocating engim: cornbination is given by Eq. (3.13), repeated here: 
= [3.13] 
where rJpr is the propeller efficiency and P is the shaft power from the piston engine. 
227 

===== PDF PAGE 241 =====
228 P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
rl A 
Figura 5.13 
Rectprocaling 
engme, or gas- I 
turbine engine, 
1 driving the 
propeHer '-'-..a..-----'1 
I 
I 
"O 
I 8, 
I "' 
dl I o 
I"-' 
I 
Sketch of the variation of thrust available versus 
velocity for a propellor-driven aircraft. 
Since power is given by force times velocity (see Section 3.2), from Eq. (3.3) the 
power available from any flight propulsion device is 
[5.47] 
Combining Eqs. (3.13) and (5.47) and solving for TA, we get 
[5.48] 
Similarly, for 
a turboprop, the power available is given by Eq. (3.29), repeated here: 
[3.29] 
Combining Eqs. (3.29) and (5.47) and solving for TA, we have 
[5.49] 
Hence, for the given power ratings, the shaft power P for a piston engine and the 
equivalent shaft power Pes for a turboprop, Eqs. (5.48) and (5.49) give the thrust 
available for 
each type of power plant, respectively. 

===== PDF PAGE 242 =====
C H A fl T E R 5 11 Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
It is interesting to note that, as described in Chapter 3 and as summarized in 
Fig. 3.29, both P and Pesin Eqs. (5.48) and (5.49) are relatively constant with V00 • 
By assuming a variable-pitch propeller such that the variation of 17pr with V 00 is 
minimized, Eqs. (5.48) and (5.49) show that TA decreases as V00 increases. This 
is consistent with the qualitative thrust available curve in Fig. 5.13, which shows 
maximum TA at zero velocity and a decrease in TA as V 00 increases. 
5.5.2 Jet-Propelled. Aircraft 
Turbojet and turbofan engines are rated in terms of thrust. Hence, for such power 
plants, is the germane quantity for the analysis of airplane performance. 
The turbojet engine is discussed in Section 3.4, where it was shown that, for 
subsonic speeds, 
TA ~ constant with V00 
and for supersonic speeds 
TA --- = 1 + l.18(M 00 - 1) 
(TA)Mach l 
The effect ot altitude on TA is given by Eq. (3.19) 
p 
Po 
[3.21] 
[3.19] 
where (TA)o is the thrust available at sea level and Po is the standard sea-level density. 
The turbofan engine is discussed in Section 3.5. Unlike the turbojet, the thrust 
of a turbofan is a function of velocity. For the high-bypass-ratio turbofans commonly 
used for civil transports, thrust decreases with increasing velocity. (This is analo­
gous to the thrust decrease with velocity for propellers sketched in Fig. 5.13, which 
makes sense because the large fan on a high-bypass-ratio turbofan is functioning 
much as a propeller.) Several relationships for the thrust variation with velocity (or 
Mach number) are given in Section 3.5. For example, Eq. (3.23) shows a functional 
relationship 
TA AM-n [3.23] 
(TA)V=O 00 
where (TA)V=O is the static thrust available (thrust at zero velocity) at standard sea 
level, and A and n are functions of altitude, obtained by correlating the data for a 
given engine. On the other hand, for a low-bypass-ratio turbofan, the thrust variation 
with velocity is much closer to that of a turbojet, essentially constant at subsonic 
speeds and increasing with velocity at supersonic speeds. 
The altitude variation of thrust for a high-bypass-ratio civil turbofan is correlated 
in Eq. (3.25) 
(TA)o = [;r [3.25] 
where (TA)o is the thrust available at sea level and Po is standard sea-level density. 
229 

===== PDF PAGE 243 =====
230 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
For a performance analysis of a turbofan-powered airplane, the thrust available 
should be obtained from the engine characteristics provided by the manufacturer. The 
above discussion is given for general guidance only. 
5.5.3 Maximum Velocity 
Consider a given airplane flying at a given altitude, with a TR curve as sketched in 
Fig. 5.14. For steady, level flight at a given velocity, say, Vi in Fig. 5.14, the value 
of TA is adjusted such that TA = TR at that velocity. This is denoted by point 1 in 
Fig. 5.14. The pilot of the airplane can adjust TA by adjusting the engine throttle in 
the cockpit. For point 1 in Fig. 5.14, the engine is operating at partial throttle, and the 
resulting value of TA is denoted by (TA)partiaI· When the throttle is pushed all the way 
forward, maximum thrust available is produced, denoted by (TA)max. The airplane 
will accelerate to higher velocities, and TR will increase, as shown in Fig. 5.14, until 
TR = (TA)max, denoted by point 2 in Fig: 5.14. When the airplane is at point 2 in 
Fig. 5.14, any further increase in velocity requires more thrust than is available from 
the power plant. Hence, for steady, level flight, point 2 defines the maximum velocity 
Vmax at which the given airplane can fly at the given altitude. 
By definition, the thrust available curve is the variation of TA with velocity at a 
given throttle setting and altitude. For the throttle full forward, (TA)max is obtained. 
The maximum thrust available curve is the variation of (TA)max with velocity at a 
given altitude. For turbojet and low-bypass-ratio turbofans, we have seen that at 
subsonic speeds, the thrust is essentially constant with velocity. Hence, for such 
power plants, the thrust available curve is a horizontal line, as sketched in Fig. 5.15. 
In steady, level flight, the maximum velocity of the airplane is determined by the high­
speed intersection of the thrust required and thrust available curves. This is shown 
schmatically in Fig. 5.15. 
Note that there is a low-speed intersection of the (TA)max and TR curves, denoted 
by point 3 in Fig. 5.15. At first glance, this would appear to define the minimum 
Figure 5.14 
(T.4)max 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(T.4)pama1 I I 
I 
I 
V1 Vmax v~ 
Partial-and full-throttle conditions; intersection of 
the thrust available and thrust required curves. 

===== PDF PAGE 244 =====
C H A P T E R 5 o Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Thrust required TR 
Figure 5.15 Thrust available curve for a rurbofe! and low-bypass-ratio 
turbofan is essentially conslonl with velocity at subsonic 
speeds. The high-s~ intersection of ihe.(T Almn._X curve and 
· !he TR curve determines the maximum veloci!y of the airplane. 
velocity of the airplane in steady, level flight. However, what is more usual is that the 
minimum velocity of the airplane is determined by its stalling speed, which depends 
strongly on CLmax and wing loading. Such matters will be discussed in Section 5.9. 
Finding Vmax from the intersection of the thrust required and thrust available 
curves, as shown in Fig. 5.15, is a graphical technique. An analytical met.hod for the 
direct solution of Vmax follows from Eq. (5.18). For steady, level flight, TR = TA. 
For flight at Vmax, the thrust available is at its maximum value. Hence, 
TR = (1',1Jmax 
In Eq. (5.18), replacing V00 with Ymax and TR with (TA)me.x, and tiling the plus sign 
in the quadratic expression because we are interested in the highest velocity, we have 
Vmax = I [(TA)max/ W](W / S) + (W / S)J[(TA)max/ W]2 - 4Cn,oK l l/2 
PooCD,O 
[5.50] 
Equation (5.50) allows the direct calculation of the maximum velocity. Moreover, 
being an analytic equation, it clearly points out the parameters that influence Ymax· 
Note in Eq. (5.50) that depends on (1) the max.imum thrust-to-weight ratio 
(TA)max/W, (2) wing loading W/S, the drag polar via Cv,o and K, and 
altitude via p00 • From this equation we see that 
1. Vmax increases as (TA)ma,J W increases. 
2. Vmax increases as W / S increases. 
3. Vmax decreases as Cn.o and/or K increases. 

===== PDF PAGE 245 =====
232 P A R T 2 @ Airpiane Performance 
The altitude effect on Vmax is also contained in Eq. (5.50). For exai-nple, for a 
turbojet-powered airplane with a tl1rust-altitude variation given by Eq. 19), 
TA o:: p / p0 , an a."l.alysis of Eq. (5.50) shows that decreases as altitude increases. 
The proof of this statement is left for you as a homework problem. 
The Gulfstream IV in Example :U is powered by two Rolls-Royce Tay 611-8 turbofans, each 
one rated at a maximum thrust at sea level of 13,850 lb. Calculate Vmax at (a) sea level and (b) 
30,000 ft Assume that m = 0.6 in Eq. (3.25). We have noted that m can be less than, equal 
to, or greater tha,-, 1, depending on the particular turbofan engine. The assumption of m = 0.6 
is for an engine with particularly good high-altitude performance; this will contribute to the 
airplane in these worked examples being a "hot" airplane. 
Assume that the thrust is constant with velocity. (Note: As explained in Section 5.1, this 
assumption is made consistently for many of the worked examples in this chapter, although 
for an actual turbofan engine it is not the case. Please remind yourself of the rationale for this 
assumption, explained at the end of Section 5.1.) 
Solution 
(a) At sea level, p00 = 0.002377 slug/ft 3. From the given data in Example 5.1, W = 73,000 
lb, S = 950 ft2 , Co,o = O.Q15, and K = 0.08. Hence, 
w 73,000 2 
Wing loading = S = ~ = 76.84 lb/ft 
(TA)max 2(13,850) Thrust-to-weight ratio = ___:_ = = 0.3795 W 73,000 
From Eq. (5.50), 
, _ { [(TA)max/W](W/S) + (W/S)J[(TA)max/W]2 - 4Co,oK 1112 
Vmax - ri ~ 
PooL D.O J 
= [0.3795(76.84) + 76.84J (0.3795) 2 - 4(0.015)(0.08) l 112 = 1 273 _6 ft/s 
(0.002377)(0.015) J ~·--~ 
Note: This result for Vmax is slightly faster than the speed of sound at sea level, which is 1,117 
ft/s. This result does not include the realistic drag-divergence phenomena near Mach 1, and 
hence is not indicative of the maximum velocity for the actual Gulfstream IV, which would be 
slightly less than the speed of sound. 
(b) At 30,000 ft, p00 = 8.9068 x 10-4 slug/ft 3 . From Eq. (3.25) for a civil turbofan, 
(TA)max = (TA)o f!_ = (2)(13,850) = 15,371 lb l.. ~I 0.6 r g. 9068 X 10-410.6 
Po~ L 0.002377 J 
Hence, 
(1'.dmax = 15,371 = 0_2106 
W 73,000 

===== PDF PAGE 246 =====
CHAPTER 5 ill Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
From Eq. (5.50), 
·r ·~ V = _ 0.2106(76.84) + 76J~4)(0.2106) 2 - 4(0.015)(0.08) 1 = I 1 534.6 ftls 
= L (8.9068 x 10-4)(0.015) J ~I -·--~ 
Again we note that the drag polar assumed for this example does not include the large drag 
rise near Mach 1, and hence the Vmax calculated above is unrealistically large. However, this 
example is intentionally chosen to two points, discussed below. 
First, we have already noted (via a homework problem) that a turbojet-powered aircraft 
with TA oc p / Po will experience a decrease in V "'"" as altitude increases. This is a mathematical 
result obtained from Eq. (5.50). However, it is easily explained on a physical basis. The thrust 
decreases proportionally to the decrease in air density as the altitude increases. In contrast, 
the drag decreases slightly less than proportionally to the air density. Why? Even though 
D = ! p00 V~ SC O , which would seem to indicate a decrease in drag proportional to the density 
decrease, keep in mind that (for a given velocity) the lift coefficient must increase with altitude 
in order fort.he lift to sustain the weight Hence, the drag due to lift increases. Examining the 
drag equation 
D = !Poo V!SCo = 1Poo V;,S(Co,o + KCz) 
we see t.l'iat as p00 decreases and CL increases as a result, D will decrease at a rate which is less 
than proportional to the air density. Hence, because the thrust off in direct proportion 
to density, we find that at altitude the thmst has decreased more than the drag, and hence 
Vmax is smaller at altitude. The opposite is t.'1.le for the turbofan-powered airplane in Example 
5.6. Here, the thrust decreases more slowly than the drag decreases with altitude, and hence 
Vmax grows larger as the altitude increases. Keep in mind that the discussion in this paragraph 
ignores the effect of drag divergence near Mach 1, hence it applies realistically to only those 
turbojet and turbofan aircraft flying below drag divergence. 
This leads to the second point. the Gulfstream IV 
in Example 5.6 has plenty of 
thrust The results of both parts (a) and (b) of the exam.pie show that if drag divergence did not 
occur, the airplane could fly at moderate supersonic speeds. Of course, the real Gulfstream IV 
does not go supersonic because it encounters drag divergence, and this large drag rise limits 
the Gulfstream IV to a maximum operating Mach number of 0.88 (see Ref. 36). This raises 
the question: Why does the Gulfstreai-n IV have more thrust than it needs to achieve Mach 
0.88? The answer is that considerations other tlian maximum flight velocity can dictate the 
design choice for maximum thrust for an airplane. For many cases, a large maximum thrust is 
necessary to achieve a reasonable takeoff distance along l'1e ground. Also, maximum rate of 
climb and maximum tum rate are determined in part by maximum thrust. Rate of climb will 
be discussed in Section 5.9, and matters associated with takeoff and tum rate are considered in 
Chapter 6. 
Historically, in the eras of the strut-and-wire biplanes and the mature propeller-driven 
airplane (see 1), maximum velocity was t.'1e primary consideration for sizing the 
engine-the more powerful the engine, the faster the airplane. However, in the era of jet­
propelled airplanes, with engines that produce more than enough thrust for airplanes to up 
against the large drag divergence, the design considerations changed. For jet airplanes intended 
to be limited to subsonic the of lhe engine was influenced by other considerations, 
as mentioned above. On the other hand, for aircraft designed to at supersonic speeds and 
which have to penetrate the transonic rise, engine size is still driven by 
consideration of 
233 

===== PDF PAGE 247 =====
234 p A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
DESIGN CAMEO 
In Example 5.6 above, TA was assumed to be con­
stant with velocity-a reasonable assumption for a sub­
sonic turbojet-powered airplane. However, the airplane 
treated in Example 5.6, indeed in most of the worked 
examples in this chapter, is patterned after the Gulf­
stream IV, which is powered by turbofan engines. The 
thrust available from a turbofan decreases with an in­
crease in flight velocity of the airplane, as noted in 
Eq. (3.23). However, in the worked examples in this 
chapter, we assume that TA is constant with V 00 strictly 
for the purpose of simplicity and to allow us to high­
light other aspects of airplane performance. This is not 
recommended for the preliminary design process for 
an airplane. During the design process, there are two 
general options for dealing with the engine: 
1. The actual desired TA to accomplish the design 
goals is determined through an iterative 
process-the "rubber engine" approach wherein 
the desired engine characteristics evolve along 
with the airframe characteristics. Then the 
engine manufacturers are approached for the 
design of a new engine to meet these 
characteristics. Considering the expense of 
designing a new engine, needless to say, this 
approach is used only in those few cases where 
the need and/or market for the new airplane is so 
compelling as to justify such a new engine. 
2. Alternatively, the new airplane design is based on 
existing engines. In the iterative design process, 
TA and other engine characteristics are known 
parameters, and the design is optimized around 
these known values. This is the design option 
most often taken. 
If an existing engine is to be used for a new airplane 
design, the known precise engine characteristics (varia­
tion of TA and specific fuel consumption with velocity 
and altitude, etc.) should be used during the design 
process. 
To illustrate the effect of more precise engine 
characteristics on airplane performance results, Prob­
lem 5.18 revisits worked Example 5.6 and assumes a 
variation of thrust available given by 
~=OAM- 0·6 
(TA)V=O OO 
~ = 0.222M;;,°"6 
(TA)V=O 
at sea level 
at 30,000 ft 
where (TA)V=O is the thrust available at sea level at 
zero velocity. The results for V max at sea level and at 
30,000 ft assuming the above variations for TA are, for 
the answer to Problem 5 .18, 
At sea level: Vmax = 860 ft/s 
At 30,000 ft: Vmax = 945 ft/s 
Compare these results with Vmax = 1,273.6 ft/sand 
1,534.6 ft/s obtained earlier in worked Example 5.6, 
which assumed a constant TA. Clearly, it is important 
to take into account the best available data for engine 
characteristics. 
5.6 POWER REQUIRED 
To begin, let us examine a general relation for power. Consider a force F acting on an 
object moving with velocity V, as sketched in Fig. 5.16a. Both F and V are vectors 
and may have different directions, as shown in Fig. 5.16a. At some instant, the object 
is located at a position given by the position vector r, as shown in Fig. 5.16b. Over a 
time increment dt, the object is displaced through the vector dr, shown in Fig. 5.16b. 
The work done on the object by the force F acting through the displacement dr is 
F · dr. Power is the time rate of doing work, or 
d dr 
Power= -(F, dr) = F · -dt dt 

===== PDF PAGE 248 =====
F 
Figure 5.16 
Since 
then 
(a) 
c H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
V F 
r 
+ 
(b) 
r-------
1 I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
I 
I _____ J 
Force acting on a moving body. (a) Force and velocity vectors; (b) force and 
displacement vectors. 
dr =V 
dt 
Power= F • V [5.51] 
Equation (5.51) is the more general version ofEq. (3.2), which holds when the force 
and velocity are in the same direction. 
Let us now apply Eq. ( 5 .51) to an airplane in straight and level flight, as sketched 
in Fig. 5.2. The velocity of the airplane is V00 • In Section 5.3, the concept of 
thrust required TR was introduced, where TR = D. In this section, we introduce the 
analogous concept of power required, denoted by PR. Since in Fig. 5.2 both T and 
V00 are horizontal, the dot product in Eq. (5.51) gives for the power required 
rs.52] 
For some aspects of airplane performance, power rather than thrust is more germane, 
as we will soon see. 
5.6. 1 Graphical Approach 
A graphical plot of PR versus V 00 for a given airplane at a given altitude is called the 
power required curve. The power required curve is easily obtained by multiplying 
thrust required by velocity via Eq. (5.52). 
235 

===== PDF PAGE 249 =====
236 
Example 5.7 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
Calculate the power required curve at 30,000 ft for the Gulfstream IV described in Example 5 .1. 
Solution 
In Example 5.1 a tabulation of TR versus V00 is made (see Table5.l). This tabulation is repeated 
in Table 5.2 along with new entries for PR obtained from Eq. (5.52). The values for PR are first 
quoted in the consistent units of foot-pounds per second and then converted to the inconsistent 
unit of horsepower. Here we note that 
1 hp= 550 ft-Ibis= 746 W 
Table 5.2 
V oo (ft/s) TR (lb) PR (ft•lb/s) PR (hp) 
300 11,768 0.3530 X 107 6,419 
400 7,313 0.2925 X 107 5,319 
500 5,617 0.2809 X 107 5,107 
600 5,084 0.3050 X 107 5,546 
700 5,166 0.3616 X 107 6,575 
800 5,636 0.4509 X 107 8,198 
900 6,384 0.5746 X 107 10,447 
1,000 7,354 0.7354 X 107 13,371 
1,100 8,512 0.9363 X J07 17,023 
1,200 9,838 0.1181 X 108 21,465 
1,300 11,321 0.1472 X 108 26,759 
The power required curve is plotted in Fig. 5 .17. 
The power required curve in Fig. 5.17 is qualitatively the same shape as the thrust required 
curve shown in Fig. 5.4; at low velocities, PR first decreases as V 00 increases, then goes through 
a minimum, and finally increases as V 00 increases. The physical reasons for this shape are the 
same as discussed earlier in regard to the shape of the thrust required curve; that is, at low 
velocity, the drag due to lift dpminates the power required, and at high velocity the zero-lift 
drag is the dominant factor. Quantitatively, the powered required curve is different from the 
thrust required curve. Comparison of Figs. 5.17 and 5.4 show that minimum PR occurs at a 
lower velocity than minimum TR. 
5.6.2 Analytical Approach 
A simple equation for PR in terms of the aerodynamic coefficients is obtained as 
follows. From Eqs. (5.52) and (5.7), we have 
[5.53] 

===== PDF PAGE 250 =====
C H A P T E R 5 @ Airplane Performance: Steady 
Figure 5.17 Calculated power required curve for the Gulfstream IV based on 
data in Example 5. l. Altitude = 30,000 fl, W = 73,000 lb. 
Since L = W for steady, level flight, 
L = W = !Poo V~SCL 
Solving Eq. (5.54) for V00 , we have 
Substituting Eq. (5.55) into (5.53), we obtain 
or 
[5,54] 
[5.55] 
[5.56] 

===== PDF PAGE 251 =====
238 
Example 5.8 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
Examining Eq. (5.56), we see that 
c3;2 
PR ex _L_ 
CD [5.57] 
Hence, minimum power required occurs when the airplane is flying such that ci12 /CD 
is a maximum value. In tum, all the characteristics associated with cci12 /CD)max 
discussed in Section 5.4.1 hold for minimum PR. In particular, at minimum PR we 
have 
1. 
( ) ( )
3/4 
c 312 1 3 
c!D = 4 KC3/ 2 
max D,O 
[5.38] 
2. Zero-lift drag equals one-third of the drag due to lift. 
3. The velocity at which PR is a minimum occurs at 
V 3;2 -(~ /K W)112 
(CL /Co)m .. - Poo y ~ S [5.41] 
This velocity is less than that for minimum TR, where CL/CD is a maximum. 
Indeed, 
[5.42] 
For the Gulfstream IV at the conditions given in Example 5.1, calculate the minimum power 
required and the velocity at which it occurs. Compare with the graphical results shown in 
Fig. 5.17. 
Solution 
The altitude is 30,000 ft, where p00 = 8.9068 x 10-4 slug/ft3. Also, W = 73,000 lb and 
S = 950 ft2 • From the drag polar, C v,o = O.DI5 and K = 0.08. From Eq. (5.38), we obtained 
in Example 5.4 
( 3/2) ~~ max = 10.83 
Hence, 
(C~) = (-1 )
2 
= 8.526 X 10-3 
CL min 10.83 
From Eq. (5.56), 

===== PDF PAGE 252 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Hence, minimum power required is 
given, by 
2W3 (Cb) 
PooS cI min 
2(73,000)3(8.526 X IQ-3) 
(8.9068 X lQ- 4)(950) 
= 2.8 x 106 ft-lb/s = I 5,091 hp I 
The velocity at which minimum PR occurs is that for flight at ccf12 /Cv)=; this velocity has 
already been calculated in Example 5.4 as 
I V = 479.6 ft/s J 
The point of minimum PR on the power required curve has the coordinates, from the above 
calculation, of (PR, V00 ) = (5091 hp, 479.6 ft/s). From Fig. 5.17, we see that these calculated 
coordinates agree with the graphical solution for the point of minimum PR. 
We note from the results of Example 5.2 that the flight velocity for minimum TR occurs 
at V(TRlmin = 631.2 ft/s, which is greater than the velocity of 479.6 ft/s obtained above for 
minimum PR. For the sake of comparison, the value of V<TRlmin is shown in Fig. 5.17. This 
again emphasizes that the point of minimum power required occurs at a lower flight velocity 
than that for minimum thrust required. 
5.7 POWER AVAILABLE AND MAXIMUM VELOCITY 
By definition, the power available, denoted by PA, is the power provided by the power 
plant of the airplane. As discussed in Section 3.2, the power available is given by 
Eq. (3.3), where 
[5.58] 
The maximum power available compared with the power required allows the 
calculation of the maximum velocity of the airplane. In this sense it is essentially an 
alternative to the method based on thrust considerations discussed in Section 5.5. We 
will examine the calculation of V max by means of power considerations in Section 
5.7.4. However, there are some aspects of airplane performance, rate of climb, for 
example, that depend more fundamentally on power than on thrust. Hence, the 
consideration of PA in this section and PR in the previous section is important in its 
own right. 
5.7.1 Propeller-Driven Aircraft 
Propellers are driven by reciprocating piston engines or by gas turbines (turboprop). 
The engines in both these cases are rated in terms of power (not thrust, as in the case 
of jet engines). Hence, for propeller-driven airplanes, power available is much more 
germane than thrust available, as discussed in Section 5.5.1. 
239 

===== PDF PAGE 253 =====
P A R T 2 ~ Airplane Performance 
Power available for a propeller/reciprocating engine combination is discussed in 
Section 3.3. In particular, 
where r/pr is the propeller efficiency and P is the shaft power from the reciprocating 
engine. Before you read further, review Section 3.3, paying particular attention to 
aspects of shaft power and propeller efficiency. 
From the discussion in Section 3.3, we recall that the velocity and altitude effects 
on P for a piston engine are as follows: 
1. Power Pis reasonably constant wit_h V00 • 
2. For an unsupercharged engine, 
p 
Po 
p 
Po 
where P and p are the shaft power output and density, respectively, at altitude 
and Po and Po are the corresponding values at sea level. Taking into account the 
temperature effect, a slightly more accurate expression is 
I I I P P I -~ ~ 1.132- - o.13, 
Po Po j 
[3, 12] 
3. For a supercharged engine, P is essentially constant with altitude up to the 
critical design altitude of the supercharger. Above this critical altitude, P 
decreases according to Eq. (3.11) or Eq. (3. with p0 in these equations 
replaced the density at the critical altitude, denoted by Pcrit· 
The power available for a turboprop is discussed in Section 3.6, which you should 
review before proceeding further. From that discussion, we have 
[3.29] 
where Pes is the equivalent shaft power, which includes the effect of the jet thrust 
Moreover, the velocity and altitude variations of PA for a are as follows: 
1. Power available PA is reasonably constant with V 00 
2. The altitude effect is approximated by 
n = 0.7 

===== PDF PAGE 254 =====
c H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
5.7.2 Turbojet and Turbofan Engines 
Turbojet and turbofan engines are rated in terms of thrust. Hence, to calculate the 
power available, simply use Eq. (5.58), repeated here: 
Turbojet engines are discussed in Section 3.4, which you should review at this 
point in your reading. The variation of PA with velocity and altitude is reflected 
through the variation of TA. Hence, for a turbojet engine: 
1. At subsonic speeds, TA is essentially constant. Hence, from Eq. (5.88), PA is 
directly proportional to V00 • For supersonic speeds, use Eq. (3.21) for TA, that 
is, 
TA --- = 1 + l.18(M 00 - 1) 
(TA)Mach I 
[3.21] 
In this case, PA for supersonic speeds is a nonlinear function of V00 • 
2. The effect of altitude on TA is given by Eq. (3.19); the effect on PA is the same. 
PA P --=-(PA)o Po 
[5.59] 
Turbofan engines are discussed in Section 3.5; you are encouraged to review this 
section before proceeding further. As in the case of the turbojet, the variation of PA 
for a turbofan is reflected through the variation of TA. Hence, for a turbofan: 
1. The Mach number variation of thrust is given by Eq. (3.23), written as 
[5.60] 
Power available is then obtained from Eq. (5.58), PA = TA V00 • This will not, in 
general, be a linear variation for PA. However, as noted in Section 3.5.1, for 
turbofans in the cruise range, TA is essentially constant; hence in the cruise 
range, PA varies directly with V00 via Eq. (5.58). 
2. The altitude variation for turbofan thrust is approximated by Eq. (3.25), 
repeated here: 
Hence the variation of PA with altitude is the same as given for TA in 
Eq. (5.61), namely, 
[5.61] 
[5.62] 
241 

===== PDF PAGE 255 =====
PART 2 ti Performance 
5.7.3 Maximum Velocity 
Consider a propeHer-d.."iven The power available is essentially constant 
with velocity, as sketched in Fig. 5.18. The intersection of Li-ie maximum power 
available curve and the power required curve defines the maximum velocity for straight 
and level 
flight, as shown in Fig. 5.18 . 
. Consider a jet-propelled airplane. Assuming TA is constant with velocity, the 
poweravailable at subsonic speeds varies linearly with V 00 and is sketched in Fig. 5 .19. 
The powerrequired PR is also sketched in Fig. 5 .19. The high-speed intersection of the 
maximum power available curve and the power required curve defines the maximum 
velocity 
for straight and level flight, as shown in Fig. 5 .19. 
figure 5.18 For a propellor-driven airplane, power available is essentially 
oonslanl wi!h velocity. The high-speed intersection of the 
maximum power available curve and the power required curve 
defines the maximum velocity of the airplane. 
Velocity V max 
For a rurbojel-powered airplane, power available varies 
essentially linearly with velocity. The high-speed intersection of 
!he maximum power available curve and the power required 
curve defines !he maximum velocity of the airplane. 

===== PDF PAGE 256 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Using the graphical approach illustrated in Fig. 5.19, obtain the maximum velocity at 30,000 
ft for the Gulfstream N described in Example 5.1. 
Solution 
The power required curve is identical to that calculated in Example 5.7; it is plotted again in 
Fig. 5.20, extended to higher velocities. The maximum power available curve is obtained from 
Eqs. (5.58) and (5.61) as 
[ p ]0.6 [8.9068 X l0-4J0.6 
PA= TA V00 = (TA)o Po V00 = 27,700 0.002 377 V00 = 15,371 V00 
... 
I 
5.0 
4.5 
4.0 
3.5 
~ 
X 3.0 
l :l 2.5 
~ 
2.0 
1.5 
l.O 
0.5 
0 200 
~~ .f 
"' ...... 
¢: 
It') 
"' :2 
II 
} 
400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400- 1,600 
Velocity, ft/s 
Figure 5.20 Calculated power required and power available curves for the 
Gulfstream IV at the conditions in Example 5.1. Altitude = 30,000 ft, 
W = 73,000 lb. 
Example 5.9 

===== PDF PAGE 257 =====
bample 5,10 
PART 2 @ Airplane Performance 
In terms of horsepower, where 550 ft-lb/s = 1 
15,371 --- _ PA= 550-V00 = d.93V 00 
This linear relation for PA is shown as the in Fig. 5.20. The intersection 
of the (PA)max and PR curves occurs at a velocity of 1,535 ft!s. This is the maximum 
attainable in straight and level flight at 30,000 ft, or 
I Vmax = l, 535 ft/s 
I 
This graphical solution for Vma., using considerations of power and power available 
gives the same result as that calculated from the consideration of thrust and thrust 
available in Example 5.6, where the calculated value was shown to be Ymax = 1,534.6 ft/s. 
We empha&ize again that the determination of Vmax means considerations (as 
carried out here) is simply an alternative to using the thrust considerations described earlier. 
Also, recall again that the value V max = 1,535 ft/s at an altitude of 30,000 ft is 
high because we have not included the transonic drag effects in the 
5.8 EFFECT OF DRAG DIVERGENCE 
VELOCITY 
The purpose of the preceding sections has been to discuss the basic aspects of thrust 
required, thrust available, power required, and power and to show how these 
considerations can be used to calculate the maximum of the 
examples used to illustrate these aspects, a drag 
the large drag rise near Mach 1; a ,.,,_,,n"''"" 
for simplicity, because the major intent was to ,,,,.,,,,,,.,,,. 
In reality, the drag polar used in the previous ex,amm,:s 
divergence Mach number. In this we examine the effect 
transonic drag rise on our estimation of maximum for the 
At 30,000 ft, 
estimate the magnitude of the transonic rise. Using this estimate, calculate the maximum 
velocity of the airplane at an altitude of 30,000 ft. with 
5.6 and 5.9, where the drag-divergence effect was not inciuded. 
Solution 
The Mach number at which the large transonic 
divergence Mach number Mon discussed in 2. 
Gulfstream IV is not readily available in the popular literature; for it is not 
Ref. 36. However, a reasonable value based on subsonic transports is Hence, for 
this example, we assume that M 00 = 0.82. 
To construct the slope of the tum to Fig. 5.3 
for guidance. Figure 5.J shows actuai data, albeit for a different 
Since we do not have the actual drag-divergence data for the Gulfstream IV, we assume that 

===== PDF PAGE 258 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
the trends are the same as those shown in Fig. 5.3. The data in Fig. 5.3, which are for the T-38, 
are repeated in Fig. 5.21. Although the ordinate in Fig. 5.3 is labeled thrust required, we recall 
that this is the same as the drag; hence the ordinate in Fig. 5.21 is labeled drag. Consider the 
two points 1 and 2 on the drag curve in Fig. 5.21. Point 1 is at M00 = 0.9 where D = 1,750 
lb, and point 2 is at M00 = 1.0 where D = 4,250 lb. The drag rise is approximated by the 
straight line through points 1 and 2, shown as the dashed line in Fig. 5.21. The slope of this 
straight line, normalized by the value of drag at point 1, denoted D1, is 
d[D/Di] (D2-D1)/D1 (4,250-1,750)/1,750 ---= = =14.3 dMoo M2 - M1 1.0 - 0.9 
We will assume this same normalized slope holds for the Gulstream IV in this example. 
At 30,000 ft, the standard air temperature is 411.86° R. The speed of sound is 
a00 = JyRT00 = J(l.4)(1,716)(411.86) = 994.7 ft/s 
Assuming Mvv = 0.82, the drag-divergence velocity is 
Vvv = Mvvaoo = (0.82)(994.7) = 815.7 ft/s 
The drag curve not including drag-divergence effects for the Gulfstream IV at 30,000 ft is 
given in Fig. 5.5. This same drag curve is plotted in Fig. 5.22. The modification of this curve 
"' I 
~ 
X 
6 
5 
4 
:9 3 
i:::i 
g 
2 
0 
Fig1,1re 5.21 
0.2 0.4 0.6 
M~ 
0.8 1.0 
Drag versus Mach number for the T-38 jet trainer. 
Altitude= 20,000 ft, W = 10,000 lb. 
245 

===== PDF PAGE 259 =====
l'ART 2 ® 
"' I 
s 
X 
:f; 
Oil 
"' Cl 
Figure 5.22 
Airplane Performance 
1s r 
I 
16 ~ 
I 
14 ~ 
I I 
:: f 
6~ 
I 
4~ 
21--
I 
0 0.2 
Drag including 
drag-divergence 
Drag-divergence 
point 
0.4 0.6 0.8 
Drag versus Moch number, 
Gulfstream IV. Altitude= 30,000 
i 
~ 
E 
I >-
1.0 l.2 1.4 
Drag not 
including 
drag-divergence 
1.6 
to account for drag-divergence effects starts at V 00 = 825 .7 ftis, which is !:he at 
divergence. Above this velocity, the drag is assumed to follow a linear increP.se with 
a slope given by tJie normalized value obtained from Fig. 5.21. Since Fig. 5.22 s• ,ws drag 
versus velocity, this normalized slope in terms of V 00 is obtained as follows. Sine, M = 
then 
dV dM=­a 
Thus, the normalized slope in terms of V 00 is 
The actual as shown in 5.22 is not normalized and is 
dD . 
-·- = D, ---·-- ·-dV"t)Q . 
The shown in 5.22 is at 
drag Doo = 5,750 lb. Let D1 = D00 • Then 
dD = 0.01438(5,750) = 82.7 

===== PDF PAGE 260 =====
CHAPTER 5 11, Airplane Performaxice: Steady Flight 
dD 
D = DDD + dV (V - VDD) 
00 
or 
D = 5,750 + 82.2(V - 815.7) 
This is the straight line shown in Fig. 5.22. 
In surnmarj, the drag curve for the Gulfstream IV, taking into account the effects of drag 
divergence based on the above assumptions, is modeled for the purposes of this example by 
the solid curve shown in Fig. 5.22. 
The maximum of the airplane is readily obtained from Fig. 5.22 by the intersection 
of the maximum thrust available curve with the drag (i.e., thrust required) curve. From Example 
5.6, (TA)max at 30,000 ft is 15,371 lb, as shown in Fig. 5.22. The maximum velocity obtained 
from the intersection point is also shown in Fig. 5.22. 
The value of Vmax can also be obtained from the equation for the linear drag increase by 
replacing D with (TA)rnax and V with Ymax· That is, from 
D = 5.750 + 82.2(V - 815.7) 
we obtain 
(TA)max = 5,750 + 82,2(Vmax - 815.7) 
Since (TA)max = 15,371 lb, we have 
Solving for Ymax 
15,371 = 5750 + 82.2(Vmax - 815.7) 
/ Vmax = 933 ft/s 
I 
Tnis corresponds to a maxiinurn Mach number of 
= Vmax = 933 = 0.938 
Mmax a00 994.7 
Comparing the above results with those obtained in Examples 5.6 and 5.9, where the 
effects of drag divergence were not included, we see that the present result is much more 
realistic. Here the maximum velocity of the airplane is below sonic speed, as appropriate to 
the class of subsonic executive jet transports represented by the Gulfstream IV. 
In Example 5.10, the estimation of the drag in the drag-divergence region was 
guided by data for a different airplane, namely, the T-38 supersonic trainer. How 
close the actual drag-divergence behavior of the Gulfstream IV is to the drag curve 
in Fig. 5.22 is a matter of conjecture. An alternate method for the estimation of 
the drag coefficient in the drag-divergence region for a generic airplane configuration 
is given in Ref. 25. Raymer's suggested procedure is as follows: 
1. The zero-lift wave drag coefficient CD. w.o is discussed in Section 2,9.2 and is 
defined in with Eq. An estimation of at or above 
247 

===== PDF PAGE 261 =====
Performance. 
= 1.2 ca., be obtained from the 
= 
is :m wave 
:ierurn-JH"""cl< 1S the theoretical zero-lift W&,Ve 
re,1on:.rw:>n, as described in 
Re[ 46, where 
In Eq. (5.64), S is the area, is t.'le maximum cross-sectional area, and l is 
the dimension of the body, reduced the length of any 
with constant cross-sectional area. FoHowi.ng n"'" """' 
Eqs. (5.63) and are used to c..ilculate at 
denoted by A in Fig. 5.23. (Although 523 contains results for a specific 
0.08 
O.G7 B 
A 
0.06 
0 
wt:$ 
'i: 0.05 
"' 'cl 
!S C 8 u 0.04 
·~ ~ .;:: 
:.al 0.03 6 
~ 
0.02 
O.oI 
0 0.2 OA 0.6 0.8 l.O 1.2 
M~ 
5.23 

===== PDF PAGE 262 =====
CHAPTERS @ Performance: Flight 
vu,,v~·'""·R'''' for the present discussion we treat Fig. 5.23 as a genelic 
0"-{11VPT<:7Pr1rP CUfVe.) 
denoted Bin Fig. 5.23, is assumed 
,2. 
3. The = LO is assumed to be about one-half that at M00 = 1.05. 
C on which is located vertically halfway between 
B and E. Point E is the drag coefficient at the critical Mach number; the drag 
coefficient at E is the conventional subsonic value of before the drag rise 
sets in. 
4. Point D denotes the zero-lift drag coefficient at the drag-divergence Mach 
number It is assumed that the difference in coefficients between points 
D and Eis about as shown in Fig. 5.23. 
nrfv'Prlm·p, to obtain the drag-divergence curve as outlined above, calculate the 
of the Gulfstream IV at 30,000 ft. From Ref. 36, the maximum diameter 
is 78 ft From the three-view in Fig. 5.1, the length of 
the constant-area section of Lhe fuselage is measured as 43 ft. 
Soluti@n 
From (5.63) evaluated at M00 = 1.2. 
= Ewn[Cn.w,olsem-Haack [5.65] 
In (5.M), 
nd2 ri(7.83) 2 
Amax= 4 = --4- = 48.15 
and 
l = 78 - 43 = 35 ft 
Note that the Sears-Haack drag fommla appl.ies to bodies of revolution, and hence only the 
maximum cross-sectional area is used. Because the frontal areas of the wings and 
nacelles are not taken into account in this formula, our subsequent calculations will underpredict 
the With this caveat, Eq. (5.64) yields 
= 9rr r1 Ama,J2 = --'!!!._ [48.15 ] 2 = 0.028 
.v,oears-1,aacs 2S L / j 2(950) 35 
Based on the suggestion Raymer 25) that Ew D range from 1.4 to 2.0 for supersonic 
fighter, bomber, and transport and can be between 2 and 3 for poor supersonic design, 
we choose (somewhat arbitrarily) a value of Ewn = 2 for the Gulfstream IV in this example. 
Then from we have 
From (2.45), the total zero-lift coefficient, including the effect of wave drag, is 
-i-

===== PDF PAGE 263 =====
250 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
where C D,e,o is the purely subsonic value of zero-lift drag coefficient, which from Example 5. 1 
is 0.015. Thus 
Cv.o = O.D15 + 0.0056 = 0.071 
This is the estimated zero-lift drag coefficient at M 00 = 1.2. This value is shown as point 
A in Fig. 5.23. It is also the same at point B. The value of Cv.o at point C is then (0.071 -
0.015)/2 + 0.015 = 0.043. At this stage, the drag-divergence curve is faired through these 
points, as shown in Fig. 5.23. 
Using the values of Cv.o from Fig. 5.23, we calculate the drag at several Mach numbers. 
Assume M00 = 0.9. Then Cv.o = 0.024 (from Fig. 5.23). At 30,000 ft, a00 = 994.7 ft/s. 
V00 = 0.9(994.7) = 895.23 ft/s 
q00 = ! Poo V~ = ! (8.9068 X 10-4)(895.23) 2 = 356.9 lb/ft2 
To treat the drag due to lift, we need the value of CL, obtained from 
From Eq. (2.47) 
W 73,000 C = - = =0.215 
L q00 S (356.9)(950) 
Cv = Cv.o + KCf = 0.024 + (0.08)(0.215) 2 = 0.0277 
D = q00 SCv = (356.9)(950)(0.02777) = 9,392 lb 
This value is denoted by point I in Fig. 5.24, which is a plot of drag in pounds as a function 
of M 00 • 
20 
16 
"' I 12 s: 
X 
::9 
00 8 
"' .... N Ci 00 
°' 0 
4 II 
:l 
I ~e 
I 
0 
0.9 0.95 1.0 
M-
Figure 5.24 Drag curve for the conditions calculated in 
Example 5.11 . · 

===== PDF PAGE 264 =====
CHAPTER 5 @ Performance: 
Assume M00 = 1.0. Then = 0.043 (from Fig. 5.23). Since V00 = 994.7 ft/s, 
= ! (8.9068 X = 440.6 lb/ft 2 
W 73,000 
cl= -- = - =0.1744 (440.6)(950) 
+ Kcf = 0.043 + (0.08)(0.1744) 2 = 0.0454 
D = q00 SCD = (440.6)(950)(0.0454) = 19,003 lb 
This value is denoted by 3 in Fig. 5.24. 
Assume M00 = 0.97. Then CD.a= 0.031 (from Fig. 5.23), and 
V,0 = 0.97(994.7) = 964.9 ft/s 
q00 = f (8.9068 X = 414.6 Jb/ft2 
73,000 
CL= (414.6)(950) = 0.1853 
CO = 0.031 + (0.08)(0.1853) 2 = 0.0337 
D = q00 SCD = (414.6)(950)(0.0337) = 13,273 lb 
This value is denoted by point 2 in Fig. 5.24. 
The curve in Fig. 5.24 is faired through points 1, 2, and 3. Also shown in Fig. 5.24 
is the maximum thrust available, (TA)max = 15,371 lb. The intersection of these two curves 
yields a maximum Mach number (M00 )max = 0.982. In tum, the predicted Vmax is 
Vmax = a00 M00 = (994.7)(0.982) = I 976.8 ft/s I 
'-- ' 
Recall that the use of the Sears-Haack drag formula, Eq. (5.64), to bodies of revolution, 
and that the value of Amax used in this formula is the maximum cross-sectional area of the 
fuselage. The frontal area of the wings, nacelles, and other parts of the airplane is not included. 
This itself will lead to an of drag and an overprediction of V max. However, 
all the other uncertainties in the calculation procedure; 
the efficiency factor E w D is 2 for this example is a 
case in point. 
The result obtained in Example 5 .11 is 4.7% higher than that obtained in Example 
5. 10. This is not a bad comparison considering the two totally different methods used 
in these two examples, as well as the difficulty in accurate estimates of th.e 
drag-divergence curve in the absence of precise experimental measurements for the 
actual airpla,.,e being analyzed. In conclusion to this section on the effect of drag 
veirge:nce on maximum velocity of an we note tJ1e following: 
1. For a transonic airplane such as the Gulfstream IV discussed here; taking into 
vP,roe•nr•0 effects is essential in a 
realistic 
251 

===== PDF PAGE 265 =====
252 PART 2 @ Performance 
2. For a preliminary of such the two rather 
approaches discussed in tl-iis section for tl:ce estimation of 
drag-divergence effects are usefoL 
DESIGN CAMEO 
Ari estimation of the variation of CD with M00 
the transonic region, that is, a of the drag­
divergence curve, is one of the more imprecise aspects 
of the airplane preliminary design process. The ap­
proach illustrated in Example 5.11 is just one of sev­
eral approximate techniques. Indeed, an examination 
of Eq. (5.63) indicates that as the sweep A in­
creases, CD, w,o increases, which is not the 
ical effect; CDwo should decrease as A increases. An­
other approximation is given by Steven Brandt et al. in 
their recent book entitled Introduction 
A Design Perspective, where Eq. (5.63) is replaced by 
CD,w,o = EwD(0.74+0.37cosA) 
X ( l - 0.3J Moo - Mc,D,0,max) 
where 
1 Mr Do - --­, .. , , ,max - cos02 A 
5.9 MINIMUM 
DEVICES 
for the Gulfstream IV, A= 27°40 1 • V/ith this sweep 
angle and 1.M00 == 1.2) the above 
= 0.052 
process, an 8% difference in the !-'"'~"'"'~'" 
is smaH, and either of the results discussed 
above would be reasonable for starter. As the 
progresses and the is refined in­
put from wind runnel tests), the above calculations are 
''°''""''°" with more data. 
Return to Fig. 5.15 for a moment, where a schematic of the thrust and max-­
imum thrust available curves is shown. Note that there are two intersections of these 
curves-a 
or may not. 
O~o-QfSl>~•ri intersection that determines 
Does the 
·~·····-·· for 
counter stall before it could ever reach the minimum 
Fig. 5.15. This ill not a hard-and-fast and both F'·"'"""'""" 
for a in order to ascertain allowable m.inirnum 
level 

===== PDF PAGE 266 =====
PT E R 5 
The variation of lift coefficient with of attack for an is discussed m 
Section 2.5, In this variation is sketched in Fig. 2. 7. where the maximum 
lift coefficient 2.7 and the related text in Section 
and review the nature of before you go furtheL 
For an the variation of total lift coefficient 
as that for an airfoil. In consider the sketch in 
A.s 
decreases. This local maximum is denoted 
l is the maximum lift 
• this combined with the loss in lift causes the 
,-.«~u,u.•~• as the of attack increases 
cwq.ncm,~0 are not flown in the stall 
V'-·"''"""""' of manned stall has been a corrunon cause of aircraft 
we discussed in Section 1.2. l how Otto Lilientt 11 was killed in 1896 
stalled and crashed to the ground. 
in the stall 
does not go to zero. of attack 
recover and exceed the value the local 
5.26. However, the drag becomes 
so a second local maximum of CL at of 
Sch~,r-r,at;c of lift c~ffki~nt versus 
cA an 
253 

===== PDF PAGE 267 =====
254 P A R T 2 e Airplane Performance 
a stall a 
Figure 5.26 Schematic of lift coefficient versus angle d olim:k 
for an airplane, !he angle of aoock 
region fur beyond !he 
attack for a conventional airplane is of acadeinic interest only. The value 
of ( C dmax used in an airplane performance analysis is that the first local 
maximum, namely, the value at point l sketched in Figs. 5.25 and 5.26. 
At a given altitude, the velocity at which an airplane stalls is determined by both 
( C dmax and the wing loading. For steady, level flight, 
L = W = !Poo 
Hence, 
When ( C dmax is inserted into Eq. 
velocity Vstall· 
the corresponding value of 
I I 2 w 1 
I Vstall = y-;;;;-s (Cdmax 
From Eq. (5.67), clearly Vsia!I depends on al.titude 
maximum lift coefficient (CL)max· In 
is the 
1. Velocity Vsia!l increases with increasing altitude Reconnais-
sance airplanes u'i.at fly at high such as the Lockheed U~2, at 
velocities near stall because CI must be large in order to lift to 
equal the weight in the rarefied air. 
2. Velocity increases with increased 
for high-speed cruise generally have 

===== PDF PAGE 268 =====
CHAPTER 5 Pe1iOnnance: 
Note that W B.nd S do not appeaI seoara1te1 
but rather in the combination This underscores 
as a funda1nental parameter in airplane p;e:rt,onm,m,;e. 
3. Velocity Vs1an decreases with increased ( C dmax. This is the grace for 
"'-·.n,e;u>,.,u with mechan-with high wing such aircraft ase 
ical devices-high-lift devices such as flaps, 
increases in ( C dmax on takeoff and ''"''"'"lS· 
The stall of an 
acteristics. The takeoff and are 
else equal, it is advantageous to have a 
t.'!ie parameter that controls 
Then, in the late 1920s and 
increased for new 
was no sufficient. 1\rtificial means became necessary to increase 
and takeoff. This is the purpose of a of mechanical 
discussed in Section 5.9.3. Before v"""'~"'""" 
the nature and cause of stall. 
stall is caused flow 
as downstream of the minimum 
within 
cannot 
In tum, the surface pressure 
distribution on the 
decreased and pressure 
v,,.u,,;,,,,~, and the are in such a fashion that lift is 
is increased--hence stall. 
Flow on a three=dirr1ensional 
nomenon. Just to underscore this statement, examine 
flow is shown over a with an 
of attack 
of difficuJt and uncertair.t Even the 111.odern 

===== PDF PAGE 269 =====
Performance 
(b) 
(c) 

===== PDF PAGE 270 =====
P TE R 5 Pexformt.nce: 
If the natural value of for safe takeoff and 
obtained from Loftin The airfoil 
on a vertical scale t.1-iat der:otes the relative 
and the number of each item on the list 
5.28. 
nurnber in 
L is shown as about 1 A. 
2. so that it can be 
3. the bottom surface of the airfoil is 
is shown at a 
·was invented 
4.0 
3.6 
3.2 
'" ,., 
u 2.8 tE ,., 
0 u 
§ 2A 
§ 
,§ 2.0 "' " s 
5 1.6 ·;;; 
w o; 
C/l 
257 

===== PDF PAGE 271 =====
258 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
C ?~:~,.~ 
~ ( e) Double-slotted flap 
C ~ 
(b) Split flap 
c _____ --7-Q:~h 
<:::). 
(f) Triple-slotted flap ' 
(c) Leading-edge slat (g) Fowler flap ' 
(.§ =====--
(h) Leading-edge flap 
6 :::::---
/ (i) Kruger flap 
Figure 5.29 Various types of high-lift devices. 
simplicity, on many of the 1930s and 40s airplanes.· However, because of the higher 
drag associated with split flaps, they are rarely used on modem airplanes. 
4. The leading-edge slat. This is a small, highly cambered airfoil located slightly 
forward of the leading edge of the main airfoil. When deployed, a slat is essentialiy 
a flap at the leading edge, but with a gap between the flap and the leading edge, as 
shown in Fig. 5.29c. The function of a leading-edge slat is primarily to modify the 
pressure distribution over the top surface of the airfoil. The slat itself, being highly 
cambered, experiences a much lower pressure over its top surface; but the flow inter­
action results in a higher pressure over the top surface of the main airfoil section. 
This mitigates to some extent the otherwise strong adverse pressure gradient that 
would exist over the main airfoil section, hence delaying flow separation over the 
airfoil. In the process (cdmax is increased with no significant increase in drag. In 
Fig. 5.28, the leading-edge slat is shown to produce about the same increase in 
(ci)max as the plain flap. 
5. The single-slotted flap. Unlike the plain flap, which is sealed between the top 
and bottom surfaces, the single-slotted flap allows a gap between the top and bottom 
surfaces, as shown in Fig. 5.29d. The slot allows the higher-pressure air on the 
bottom surface of the airfoil to flow through the gap, modifying and stabilizing the 
boundary layer over the top surface of the airfoil. Indeed, flow through the slot 
creates a low pressure on the leading edge of the flap, and essentially a new 
boundary layer is formed over the flap which allows the flow to remain attached to 
very high flap deflections. Figure 5.28 indicates that a single-slotted flap generates a 

===== PDF PAGE 272 =====
CHA ,ER 5 Performance: 
are in cormnon use 
6. 
two are even as indicated 
5.28. This benefit is achieved at the 
7. The '"'""'"'""··,, 
mutual benefit to be obtained by '-'"H""-'""'"'" devices 
is shown 
in 5.28. 
8. Addition flov,; over 
in combination with the adverse pressure the 
me:crnam,cru11 sucking 
small holes or slots in the top surface 
serJarauon can be delayed. This can lead to substantial increases 
in as shown in Fig. 
5.28. However, the increased mechanical vvu, 1Jn.-~,,,y 
and cost of this with the power on the pumps, diminish 
Active has not been 
It remains in the category of an advanced 
item. 
Several devices 
not shown in Fig. 5.28 are sketched in Fig. 5.29f 
is shown in Fig. 5.29f. This is used on several 
commercial with wing loadings; the 747 shown in Fig. 1.34 
is a case in point. An airfoil with devices and a triple-slotted 
flap generates about the ultimate in high (c1 )ma,; associated with mechanical 
high-lift systems. However, it is also almost the 
ultimate in mechanical complexity. 
For lhis reason, in the interest of lower design and costs, recent airplane 
designs have returned to simpler mechanisms. For the Boeing 767 has 
single-slotted outboard flaps and double-slotted inboard 
A Fowler is sketched in Fig. 5.29g. We have mentioned the Fuwler be-
fore, in Fig. 1.23. The Fowler flap, when not deflects 
increasing the effective but also translates or tracks to the 
airfoil, hence increasing the exposed area with a further increase in lift Today, 
the concept of the Fowler flap is combined with the double-slotted and 
flaps. The on a Boeing mentioned earlier, are also Fowler 
A leading-edge flap is illustrated in Fig. 5.29h. the pivots 
downward, 
increasing the effective camber. Unlike the leading-edge slat shown in 
Fig. 5.29c, the leading-edge is with no slot. 
A Kruger flap is shown in Fig. 5.29i. This is a slat 
which is and which lies flush with the bottom surface of the airfoil when not 
Hence, it is suitable for 
use with thinner airfoils. 
The effect of slats and 5.30. 
In Fig. 5.30a to c, the lift curve labeled un,11,u,,11.n,u 
at either the the lift curve for the basic airfoil 
of attack ot in Fig. 5.30a to c 

===== PDF PAGE 273 =====
260 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
(a) 
,,...-, Slotted flap 
........ I 
Plain flap 
Unflapped airfoil 
a 
(c) 
Extended flap (Fowler flap) 
Unflapped airfoil 
a 
(b) 
Figure 5.30 Effect of various high-lift devices on the lift curve. (a) Plain Rap and slotted Rap; {b) extended 
(Fowler) Rap; (c) leading-edge Rap and slat. 
as usual represents the angle of attack of the basic airfoil, as shown in Fig. 5.31a. 
Now imagine that the basic airfoil in Fig. 5.31a has a plain flap, and that the flap is 
deflected through the angle 8 as shown in Fig. 5.31b. Imagine that this flap deflection 
is locked in (i.e., fixed), and the flapped airfoil is pitched through a range of angle 
of attack a, where a is still defined as the angle between the original chord line and 
the free-stream direction, as shown in Fig. 5.31b. The resulting variation of c, with 
a is given by the curve labeled plain flap in Fig. 5.30a. Note that the effect of the 
flap deflection is to shift the lift curve to the left. The lift slope of the flapped airfoil 
remains essentially the same as that for the basic airfoil; the zero-lift angle of attack 
is simply shifted to a lower value. The reason for this left shift of the lift curve has 
two components: 
1. When the flap is deflected downward as shown in Fig. 5.31b, the effective 
camber of the airfoil is increased. A more highly cambered airfoil has a more 
negative zero-lift angle of attack. 
2. If a line is drawn from the trailing edge of the flar, through the airfoil leading 
edge (the dashed line in Fig. 5.31b) and this line is treated as a "virtual" chord 
line, then the flapped airfoil is at a "virtual" angle of attack which is larger 
than a, as sketched in Fig. 5.31b. That is, compared to the angle of attack of the 
unflapped airfoil a (which is the quantity on the abscissa of Fig. 5.30a to c), the 
flapped airfoil appears to the free stream to have a slightly higher angle of attack. 
Also note in Fig. 5.30a that the deflected plain flap results in a larger (c1)max than the 
unflapped airfoil, and that this maximum lift coefficient generally occurs at a smaller 
angle of attack than that for the unflapped airfoil. 

===== PDF PAGE 274 =====
C A TER 5 Perfo1mance: Steady 
(a) Basic airfoH 
(rl) Deflected leading-edge flap 
5.31 Vario1Js aspects of 
If the were a slotted such as sketched in Fig. 
then the lift curve would be extended as indicated the dashed shown in 
Fig. 5.30a. The flow the slot from the bottom surface to the 
surface the airfoil can then be 
mcrease in 
dashed curve in Fig. 5.30b. The presence of the slot does not 
lift or the zero-lift of attack. 
The effect of a Fowler on the lift curve is sketched in 5.30b. As shown 
in the increases the effective camber 
the zero-lift of attack 
to the 
which in tum increases the of the lift cun.r,e. This increased 
~~rea, 
seen 
in Fig. to the 

===== PDF PAGE 275 =====
262 PART 2 "' Performance 
deflection with no 
increases the lift is as follows. 
Consider the extended we show the case 
of extension For the basic airfoil with no the 
lift per unit span is 
L = q(X)CC/ 
where c is the chord of the basic as shown in 5.31c. LetL*denotethelift 
per unit span ;;vith the 
For this case, 
the distance 8-c, as also sketched in 
L* = + 
cq00 , we see that Eq. becomes 
L * l D.c \ -- == i 1 -l --- ~ Cf 
qCJOc \ C ) 
5.31c. 
Basing the lift coefficient for the airfoil with an ex!ended on the chord of the 
basic airfoil with no extension, and this lift coefficient by c(, where 
we have from Eq. 
c( == Lie'\ 
+-iC/ 
C j 
with respect to a, we have 
da 
11c '\ +-,­
. C } da 
In Eq. is the lift slope of the airfoil with no extension. 
with a flap extension of iJ.c, the lift is increased the amount 6.c/c, as seen 
from Eq. (5.72). This increase in the lift slope is sketched in 5.30b. 
Consider flap as sketched 5 .29h. The effect of the deflection 
of a leading-edge on the lift curve is shown in Fig. 5.30c. The Hft curve is shifted 
to the right, with virtually no change in the lift slope. the shift to the in 
contrast to the left shift associated with a The answer is illustrated 
which shows an airfoil with a deflected leading-edge When the 
""'""'"c,,u, the effective camber is which shifts the lift curve to the 
left However, this is more than the influence of the "virtual" angle 
of attack. In Fig. the solid line drawn from the leading edge to the 
of the basic airfoil is the chord line of the basic and this chord line 
defines the angle of attack a, as usual. When the 
uc,1,1.,"''""' the dashed line drawn edge of the 
of the airfoil defines a virtual chord and this virtual 
chord line relative to the free-streai.,:1 defines the virtual angle of attack shown 
in 5 .3 ht This vhtual of attack is smaller than a, which shifts the lift curve 
the The net effect of the deflection of a leading-edge a 
shift of the lift curve, as sketched in 5.30c. Note also that a ''""'"'"""'-v"'"'"' 
results in a relative to the basic airfoil. 

===== PDF PAGE 276 =====
CHAPTER 5 @ Performance: 
If the leading-edge 1s a as sketched in Fig. 
the same right shift of the lift curve takes place; but because the deployment of the 
leading-edge slat effectively increases the area a small amount, there is a 
small increase in the lift as indicated by the dashed curve in Fig. 5 30c. Because 
of the favorable influence of the flow the slot between the slat and the basic 
airfoil, (c1)max for the than that for tl-ie flap, 
also sketched in Fig. 5.30c. 
5.9,4 
Some of device has been used on almost every designed since 
the early 1930s. Its purpose is to increase the maximum lift coefficient 
(Cdrnax, hence reducing via Eq. to 
some small value is not the story obtained from Eq. The real story 
is told by Eq. for the maximum of an Return to for 
a moment Note that for a given maximum nu·no,_,,_.,_,""'' 
directly to y'W / S. The higher the wing the higher V max is. This 
is most high-speed with high wing loadings. Now return 
to which shows that is proportional to .fW7S also. If nothing else is 
done, a high-speed ,vill have an high because of the high 
wing loading. The solution to this is also embodied in Eq. (5.67)-increase 
( C LJmax sufficiently in of the large will be acceptable. In tum, 
high-lift devices are the means to obtain the " ~fficient increase in From 
this of devices ma..1(.e efficient 
high-speed flight ~v,,~nns.,. 
On another note, we should mention that the values of achieved by high-
lift devices airfoil values of shown 
in Fig. 5.28. Thi.sis c01Jco~·""' v 
for a given should be obtained from wind tunnel tests. For our 
purposes in trns chapter, some guidelines are in Table 5.3, where the (CLJmax 
values are those rer •mmended Torenbeck in Ref 35. In Table 5.3, A is the sweep 
angle of the 
5.3 
Pia' 
Sln~ 0tted flap 
Fowler flap 
single-slotted 
do11ble-slo1ted 
doi!ble-slottoo slat 
m.ple-slotl!'.d slat 
line. 
Typkai Flap Angle 
·n,keoft:' Limding 
zoo 60° 
20° 40° 
15° 40° 
20° 50° 
2(}'' .soo 
20° 40° 
(Ci)m,,,/co§ A 
Takeoff' Landing 
1.4-1.6 l.7-2.0 
l.5-J.7 Ul-2.2 
2.0-,2.2 2.5-2.9 
1.7-L95 2.3-2.7 
2.3-2.6 2.8-3.2 
2.4-2.7 3.2-3.5 
263 

===== PDF PAGE 277 =====
264 
Example 5. 12 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
Calculate the minimum velocity of the Gulfstream IV at sea level based on (a) the low-speed 
intersection of the thrust available and the thrust required curves and (b) the stalling velocity. 
This airplane is equipped with single-slotted Fowler trailing-edge flaps. The wing sweep angle 
is 27°40'. 
Solution 
(a) The minimum velocity based on the low-speed intersection of the thrust available and thrust 
required curves (point 3 in Fig. 5.15) can be obtained from Eq. (5.18) by using the minus sign 
in the numerator, that is, 
[ ] 
1/2 
. _ (T/W)(W/S) - (W/S)J(T/W) 2 -4Cv.oK 
Vmm- C Poo D,0 
In the above equation, from the data for the Gulfstream IV given in Example 5.6, namely, 
W / S = 76.84 lb/ft2, T / W = 0.3795, C v,o = 0.015, K = 0.08, and p00 = 0.002377 slug/ft3, 
we have 
v: . = [0.3795(76.84) - 76.84J (0.3795) 2 - 4(0.015)(0.08)] 112 = I i 17 ft/s 
mm 0.002377(0.015) . 
(b) From Eq. (5.67), 
V,ta11= 
2 W 
Poo S (Cdmax 
From Table 5.3, for a single-slotted Fowler flap in its most fully deployed configuration (that 
for landing), we choose 
Hence, 
Thus, 
(Cdmax = 2_7 
cos A 
(Cdmax = 2.7 Cos 27°40' = 2.39 
V,ta11= (2)(76.84) = I 164.5 ft/s I 
(0.002377)(2.39) 
Clearly, the stalling velocity defines the minimum velocity for the Gulfstream IV in steady, 
level flight. The velocity calculated for the low-speed intersection of the TA and TR curves, 
namely, 117 ft/s, is of academic interest only. 
It is interesting to note that the stalling velocity for the actual Gulfstream IV is given as 
182 ft/s in Ref. 36. This value is quoted for both wheels and flaps down, and for a maximum 
landing weight of 58,500 lb. This weight is less than the maximum takeoff weight of 73,000 
lb, which was the value of W used in the present worked example. In any event, our calculation 
of V,tatl = 164.5 ft/sis a reasonable approximation. 

===== PDF PAGE 278 =====
CH,APTER 5 Perlo1mance: 
encounter a 
ai'lead-a to 
Or, 
"""'~.,,;,,,v that you encounter bad weather or turbulence at some and you want 
to get out of it to a altitude. How fast you can do this 
You need to get to that target as soon as 
can do so on the of your ~.,,,.,,,~,.,v For these and 
other reasons, the climb 
nPrt1,nT1,"1('P scenario. Climb r,,,,rl,rw,cr. 
is an essential pan of the overall 
of this section. 
with of an 
unaccelerated 
4.2, Return to Fig. 4.2 and it 
6, is defined as the between the instantaneous flight 
the relative wind note that 
of attack of the airplane-a held 
students new to the The 
the 
accelerated 
review the derivation 
on. 
::he vertical component 
T cos " - D - W sine = 0 
L + T sin E - W cos 8 = 0 
we assume the thrnst line is in the direction of that 
and 
T - D - W sin e = 0 
L - W cosG 
is shown in which 
265 

===== PDF PAGE 279 =====
266 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
u 
_________ j __ 
, Horizontal 
u 
w VH 
Vv=RIC 
=V~sinu 
Figure 5.32 Force and velocity diagrams for climbing Right. 
the rate of climb by R / C. From this diagram, 
I R/C = Voo sine I 
Multiplying Eq. (5.75) by V00 /W, we have 
I . TV00 - DVoo V00 sme = R/C = W 
[5.77] 
(5.78] 
In Eq. (5. 78), TV 00 is the power available, and D V 00 is the powerrequired to overcome 
the drag. We define 
Hence, from Eq. (5.78), 
TV00 - DV00 = excess power I 
R / C = _ex_c_es_s_po_w_e_r 
w 
(5.79) 
(5.80) 
Clearly, rate of climb depends on raw power in combination with the weight of the 
airplane. The higher the thrust, the lower the drag, and the lower the weight, the 
better the climb performance-all of which makes common sense even without the 
benefit of the above equations. 
At this stage in our discussion, it is important to note that, for steady climbing 
flight, lift is less than weight; indeed, from Eq. (5.76), 
L = Wcose (5.81) 
This is because, for climbing flight, part of the weight of the airplane is supported 
by the thrust, and hence less lift is needed than for level flight. In turn, this has an 

===== PDF PAGE 280 =====
CHAPTER 5 @ Performance: 
impact on drag; less lift means less drag due to lift. For a given velocity V 00 , the drag 
in climbing flight is less tha.n tt'lat for level Quantitatively, we can write for 
steady climbing flight, 
From the drag polar, 
(CD,O + KCi) 
Substituting CL from Eq. {5.82) into Eq. (5.83), we have 
r (w cose\ 21 
D = q00 S I CD,0 + K ) J qcoS / ... 
or 
KW2 cos2 8 
D = qooSCD,O + S qoo 
[5.84] 
The value of D from Eq. (5.84) is the value that goes in Eq. (5.78) for rate of climb. 
Combining Eqs. (5.78) and (5.84), we have after some algebraic manipulations (the 
details are left for a homework problem) 
[ r 1 ,w)-1 
sine = V 00 W - 2 Poo V~ ( S _ W 2K cos2 e] 
S Poo V&, 
Note that in Eq. (5.85) the weight does not appear separately, but rather in the form of 
the thrust-to-weight ratio Wand the wing loading Once again we observe the 
importance of these two design parameters, this time in rega.rd to perlormance. 
Equation (5.85) is the key to the exact solution of the climb perlormance of an 
airplane. Unfortunately, it is unwieldly to solve. Note that V00 and e appear on both 
sides of the equation. In principle, for a given V00 , Eq. (5.85) can be solved by trial 
and error fore, hence yielding R/C = V,0 sine for the given value of V00 • for a 
given value of fJ, Eq. (5.85) can be solved by trial and error for V00 , hence yielding 
R/C = V00 sine forthegivene. 
Fortunately, for a preliminary performance analysis, this hard work is usually not 
necessary. Let us mak:e the assumption that for the drag expression only, cos e ~ 1. 
For example, in Eq. (5.84), set cos e = 1. This assumption leads to remarkably 
accurate results for climb perlormance for climb angles as large as 50° degrees. 
Indeed, in their elegant analysis in Ref. 41, Mair and Birdsall show that for a climb 
angle of 50°, by ma_king the assumption that cos 8 = 1 in the drag expression, the 
error in the calculated climb angle is 2.5° or smaller, and the error in the calculated 
rate of climb is 3% or less, This is particularly fortuitous, because the normal climb 
angles of conventional airplanes are usually less than 15°. Hence, in the remainder 
of this section, we assume cos e = 1 in the drag expression. A more general energy­
based method which can be applied to accelerated climb and which accurately treats 
the case for any climb angle (even will be discussed in Chapter 6, 

===== PDF PAGE 281 =====
PA 
78) for the rate of climb. On the 
discussed in Section 5.7, a.rid the term with the n,n""'"''""' 
level discussed in Section 5 A Hence 
the excess power, defined in a.,d used for the calculation of rate of climb 
in Eq. is the difference between the power available and the power 
curves, where the power level 
most normal pe1:to1r:m1:mc:e 
calculation of maximum 5.33 for both 
propeller-driven 
ttie difference between the ordinates of the 
a graphical construction for the variation of 
At any V00 , measure tl1e excess power from the difference between the 
curves shown in Fig. 5.34a. Divide this excess power by the 
value of at this velocity via out this process for a range of 
V 00 , obtaining the corresponding values of R / C. The locus of these values for 
is sketched in Fig. 5.34b, which is a of R/C versus velocity for the---,-------
Recall that the and curves sketched in Fig. 5.34a are for a given 
the variation of versus velocity sketched in 5.34b is also for a 
note that at some the difference between the PA and curves will be 
a maximum, as identified in Fig. 5.34a; in turn, this is t.l:!e velocity at which is a 
maximum value, as identified in Fig. 5.34b. the at which the 
and curves intersect is the maximum as discussed 
in Section 5.7. No excess power exists at Vmm and hence 
as shown in Fig. 5.34b. 
An even more useful 1mmruc:ar 
is a versus its hodzontal as 
sketched in Fig. 5.35. The hodogrnph '"'"'""'"'"' is different from the curve 
f 
Excess 
J power 
I~/ 
L~,aDV_ 
(!!) Propeller-driven airplane (b) Jet-propelled airplane 
5.33 iliustralion of excess power for and 

===== PDF PAGE 282 =====
Figure 5.34 
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Maximum~ 
excess 
power 
(a) 
(R/C)max 
"\'(RIC)miu 
(b) 
RIC = Excess power 
w 
Variation of rate of climb with velocity at a 
given altitude. 
shown in Fig. 5.34b. In both cases the ordinate is R/C, which by definition is 
the vertical component of velocity Vv. However, in Fig. 5.35 the abscissa is the 
horizontal component of velocity V H, not the total velocity V 00 which is the abscissa 
in Fig. 5.34b. The geometric relation among V00 , VH, Vv, and () is also shown 
in Fig. 5.35, for convenience. Consider an arbitrary point on the hodograph curve, 
denoted by point 1 in Fig. 5.35. Draw a line from the origin to point 1. Geometrically, 
the length of the line is V00 , and the angle it makes with the horizontal axis is the 
corresponding climb angle at that velocity. Point 2 in Fig. 5.35 denotes the maximum 
R / C; the length of the line from the origin to point 2 is the airplane velocity at 
maximum R / C, denoted by V max R/ c, and the angle it makes with the horizontal axis 
is the climb angle for maximum R/C, or ()maxR/C· A line drawn through the origin 
and tangent to the hodograph curve locates point 3 in Fig. 5.35. The angle of this line 
relative to the horizontal defines the maximum possible climb angle ()max, as shown 
in Fig. 5.35. The length of the line from the origin to the tangent point (point 3) is 
the velocity at the maximum climb angle. Important: Looking at Fig. 5.35, we see 
that the maximum rate of climb does not correspond to the maximum climb angle. 
The maximum climb angle ()max is important when you want to clear an obstacle 
269 

===== PDF PAGE 283 =====
PART 2 ~ 
. V~, RIC 
~I LJ_~ j 
VH 
5.35 altitude. 
while covering the rrtlnimum horizontal distance along the ground. The maximum 
rate of climb (R/ C)max is important when you want to achieve a certain altitude in a 
minimum amount of time. calculation of tt1e time to climb to a given altitude 
is considered in Section 5.12.) Note that V00 is smallest at Bmax, and it increases 
as e is made smaller. This is why (R/C)mu does not occur at 6lm.,,,; rather, since 
= V00 sin!9, from point 3 to 2 in Fig. 5.35 the increase in V00 exceeds the 
decrease in sin 8, leading to an increase in V 00 sin e. 
5. 10.2 Analytical Approach 
By making the assumption in the drag relation that cos e = 1, Eq. (5.85) becomes 
[ T 1 f W)-i W 2K l V sinB=R/C=V ---p V2 1- Cno----j 00 00 w 2 00 00 \ s . s y2 , / Poo oo 
Given V00 , the corresponding can be calculated from The 
corresponding climb angle can be found from 
sin8 = --

===== PDF PAGE 284 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Auplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Alternately, we note that by dividing Eq. (5.86) by V00 , we obtain 
T 1 (w)-i W 2K sinO=---p V2 - Coo----W 2 00 00 S ' S Poo V&, [5.88] 
Equation (5.86), with its counterpart Eq. (5.88), contains some useful information 
about climb performance and the design parameters of an airplane that dictate climb 
performance. In particular: 
1. Equation (5.86) is simply an elaborate form ofEq. (5.78), repeated here in a 
slightly different form. 
T-D 
V00 sinO = V00 ~ [5.89] 
Clearly, from Eq. (5.89), more thrust, less drag, and smaller weight all work to in­
crease the rate of climb. Equation (5.86) spells out more clearly the design param­
eters. For example, increasing the thrust-to-weight ratio increases R/C. The last 
two terms in Eq. (5.86) represent the zero-lift drag and the drag due to lift, respec­
tively, both divided by the weight. A decrease in Co,o or K, or in both, increases 
R/C. 
2. The effect of increasing altitude usually is to decrease R/C. All three terms in 
Eq. (5.86) are sensitive to altitude through p00 • The effect of altitude on T depends 
on the type of power plant used. However, for turbojets, turbofans, and unsuper­
charged piston engines with propellers, thrust at a given V 00 decreases with altitude 
(as discussed in Section 5.5 and in Chapter 3). For an airplane with any reasonable 
climb capacity, the dominant term in Eq. (5.86) is T / W; hence when T / W de­
creases with increasing altitude, R/C also decreases. However, for supercharged 
piston engines with variable-pitch, constant-speed propellers, the story may be 
different. Up to the critical altitude of the supercharged engine, power output is 
reasonably constant; hence at a given V00 , the thrust output of the propeller can be 
maintained reasonably constant with increasing altitude by increasing the propeller 
pitch angle. The consequences of this on the altitude variation of R / C at a given 
V00 depend on how drag varies with altitude at the same V00 • The drag is given by 
the last two terms in Eq. (5.86). The middle term shows that at a given V 00 the 
zero-lift drag decreases with increasing altitude, whereas the last term shows that at 
a given V 00 the drag due to lift increases with increasing altitude. If V 00 is low, the 
drag due to lift dominates the total drag, and hence in this low-velocity range, drag 
increases with altitude at a given V00 • If V00 is high, the zero-lift drag dominates the 
total drag, and hence in this high-velocity range, drag decreases with altitude at a 
given V00 • Hence, in this high-velocity range, for an airplane with a supercharged 
piston engine, the R/C for a given V00 theoretically can increase with altitude. We 
repeat again that, in general, the dominant term in Eq. (5.86) is T / W, and the effect 
of altitude on T / W dominates the altitude variation of R / C. 
3. From Eq. (5.86), wing loading also affects R/C. At a given arbitrary V00 , this 
effect is a mixed bag. Note from the drag terms in Eq. (5.86) that increasing W / S 
decreases the zero-lift drag and increases the drag due to lift. Hence, in the 
271 

===== PDF PAGE 285 =====
272 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
low-velocity range where drag due to lift is dominant, an increase in the design 
W / S results in a decrease in R / C at the same V 00 • However, in the high-velocity 
range where zero-lift drag is dominant, an increase in W / S results in an increase in 
R/C at the same V00 • 
The above considerations, gleaned from Eq. (5.86) for a given, arbitrary V00 , 
are rather general, and in some cases the trends are somewhat mixed. More specific 
information on the airplane design parameters that optimize climb performance can 
be obtained by studying the cases for maximum climb angle Bmax and maximum rate 
of climb (R/ C)max, We now turn our attention to these two specific cases. 
Maximum Climb Angle Dividing Eq. (5.78) by V00 , we have 
From Eq. (5.76), 
. T D smB=--­W W 
L W=­cose 
Replace Win the drag term ofEq. (5.90) by Eq. (5.91): 
. T cose sme=---­
w L/D 
By making the assumption that cos e = 1, Eq. (5.92) becomes 
. T 1 sme=---­
w L/D 
[5.90] 
[5.91) 
[5.92) 
[5.93) 
Consider the case of a jet-propelled airplane where the thrust is essentially con­
stant with velocity. Then Eq. (5.93) dictates that the maximum climb angle Bmax will 
occur W/hen the lift-to-drag ratio is a maximum, that is.for a jet-propelled airplane. 
. T 1 [ ] sme = - - 5.94 max W (L/ D)max 
Recalling Eq. (5.30) for (L/ D)max, we see that Eq. (5.94) can be written as 
I ,me™~~ -)4Co,oK I [5.951 
The flight velocity corresponding to Bmax is obtained as follows. From Eq. (5.76) 
L = W cose = !Poo V!SCL 
For maximum L/ D, Eq. (5.29) holds . 
.Ci_= ff 
[5.96) 
[5.29] 

===== PDF PAGE 286 =====
C H A P T E R. 5 ~ Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Substituting Eq. into (5.96), we have, where e and V00 in Eq. (5.96) now 
become and 
Solving Eq. for 
, respectively, 
W cos8max = ~Poo V;,,,,,s)cf·0 
, we have for a jet-propelled 
/ 2 ( K \ l/2 W I 
= 1 - \ -. } - COS Bmax I 
j Poo \ C D.O S I 
[5.97] 
[5.98] 
Finally, the rate of climb that corresponds to the maximum climb angle is given by 
sin&max 
where, in Eq. is obtained from Eq. (5.98) and &max is obtained from 
Eq. (5.95). Note from Eq. (5.95) that Bmax does not depend on wing loading, but from 
Eq. Vem,, va,."ies directly as . Hence, everything else being equal, for 
flight at 8max, the rate of climb is higher for higher wing loadings. Also, the effect 
of altitude is clearly seen from these results. Since (L/ D)max does not depend on 
altitude, then from Eq. &max decreases with altitude because T decreases with 
altitude. However, from Eq. (5.98) Vemax increases with altitude. These are competing 
effects in determining (R/ C)em,, from Eq. (5.99). However, the altitude effect on @max 
usually dominates, and (R/C)em., usually decreases with increasing altitude. 
Caution.' For a given airplane, it is possible for Vemax to be less than the stalling 
velocity. For such a case, it is not possible for that airplane to achieve the theoretical 
maximum climb angle. 
Consider the case for a propeller-driven airplane. From Eq. (5.48), 
7/prP TA= - [5.48] Voo 
where 7/pr is the propeller efficiency and P is the shaft power from the reciprocating 
piston engine the effective shaft power Pes for a turboprop). The product T/prP is 
the power available which we assume to be constant with velocity. The climb 
angle for the propeller-driven airplane is given Eq. (5.88) with (5.48) inserted 
for the thrust, that is, 
1 (W)-i W 2K sinB = - -p V 2 - Cvo -- ---V 00 W 2 00 00 \ S ' S Poo V~ 
In Eq. (5.100), 7/prP is assumed constant with velocity. Although Eq. (5.100) does 
not give useful information directly for 9max, such information can be obtained by 
Eq. and setting the derivative equal to zero, thus defining the 
conditions that will maximize sin e. 
Eq. (5. with respect to 
B) T/prP 
--- = -WV2 -- Poo Voo 
(X) 
w -1 
s 
we have 
W K +2--l--­
s 2 Poo 
273 

===== PDF PAGE 287 =====
274 P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
Setting the right-hand side of Eq. ( 5.101) to zero, we obtain after a few algebraic steps 
(with V00 now representing Ve .... ) 
This author cannot find any analytical solution to Eq. ( 5 .102 ), nor can he find any such 
solution in the existing literature. However, Hale in Ref. 49 has shown that for a typical 
propeller-driven airplane, t..1-ie magnitudes of the last two terms in Eq. ( 5 .102) are much 
larger than the magnitude of the first term, and hence a reasonable approximation 
can be obtained by dropping the V8:_. term in Eq. (5.102), obtaining for V11'""" for a 
propeller-driven airplane, 
4(W/S)K Ve ~-----
'"" Poo'l'/pr(P/W) 
In tum, Ve"""' obtained from Eq. (5.103) can be inserted into Eq. (5.100) to obtain 
Bmax. 
Caution: Once again we note that for a given airplane, it is possible for Ve_ to 
be less than Vs!all· For such a case, it is nnt possible for the airplane to achieve the 
theoretical maximum climb angle. 
Maximum Rate of Climb Consider the case of a jet-propelled airplane where T is 
relatively constant with V 00 • Rate of climb is given by Eq. (5.86). Conditions asso­
ciated with maximum rate of climb can be found by differentiating Eq. (5.86) and 
settng the derivative equal to zero. Differentiating Eq. (5.86) with respect to V00 , we 
have 
[5. HM] 
If we set the right-hand side of Eq. (5.104) equal to zero and then divide it by 
3/2p 00 (W/S)- 1Cv,o, we obtain 
V!- 2(T/W)(W/S) _ 4~(W/S): = O [S.lOS] 
3pooCv,o 3p00 Co.0V00 
Recall.ing from Eq. (5.30) that [L/ D]max = I/J4KCv,o, we see that the last term 
in Eq. (5.105) can be expressed in terms of (L/ D)max. Also, multiplying by V~, 
Eq. (5.105) becomes 
4 _ 2(T/W)(W/S) 2 _ (W/S) 2 _ O 
voo voo 2 2 2 -
For simplicity, let 
3pooC D,O 3p00 C D,o(L/ D)max 
Q= W/S 
3pooCD.O 
X= V! 
[5,107] 

===== PDF PAGE 288 =====
C H A P T E R 5 @ Airplane Performance: Steady Fl.ight 
Then Eq. (5.106) can be written as 
~ T 3Q2 
x" -2-Qx - = 0 
W (L/ D)'fr.ax 
Eq. (5.109) is a quadratic equation i.n terms of x (that is, in terms of V!). From the 
quadratic formula, we obtain 
2(T/W)Q ± J4(T/W)2Q 2 + 12Q 2/(L/D)~ax 
x= 2 [5.HO] 
By factoring (T / W) Q out of the radical, Eq. (5.110) becomes 
x = ~ Q ± ~ Qjl + 3/(L/D);,.ax(T/W)2 
or 
x= :Qll±v'l+ (L/D)~:(T/W)2) [5.1 H] 
In Eq. (5.111), the minus sign gives a negative value of x; t.i:lis is nonphysical, hence 
we wm. use only the plus sign. Finally, replacing Q and x in Eq. (5.111) with 
their definitions given in Eqs. (5.107) and (5.108), respectively, and noting that V00 
represents V(R/C)m,x' we have for a jet-propelled airplane, 
I V: - I (T/W)(W/S) I 
(ll./C)max - 3 C l + Poo D.O 
1 ' 3 J 11/2 
- '(L/D)~r,x(T/W) 2 
An equation for the maximum rate of climb is obtained by substituting V(R/C)""" 
from Eq. (5.112) into Eq. (5.86). To simplify the resulting expression, let 
z = 1 + 1 + (L/D)~:(T/W)2 
Then Eq. (5.112) becomes 
V: _ [(T/W)(W/S)Z] 112 
(R/C)m,,. - 3p C . oo D,O 
Substituting Eq. (5.114) into Eq. (5.86), we have 
(R/C)max = [(T /W)(W /S)~J1;2 
3pooCD,O 
[5, H3] 
x r!._ _ iPoo (T/W)(W/S)ZCD,o _ 2{W/S)K(3p 00 Cv,o)l 
_W 2 3pooCv,o(W/S) p00 (T/W)(W/S)Z J 
or 
(R/C) = l'"(T/W)(W/S)ZJ [!...-~!_- 6KCv,o 1 
max I. 3p00 Cn,o W 6 W (T / J 

===== PDF PAGE 289 =====
276 P P.< R T 2 * Airplane Perforrna.'1ce 
The last term in Eq. 
l/(4KCn.o). 
6KCD,O 
W)Z 
can be written as 
(3/2)(T I 
(T/W) 2Z 
Hence, Eq. 115) becomes/or 
by recalling that 
3T/W = ----,-----'Wy'2( f I D\2 7 ' \~/ /max"'--' 
r (W/S)Z -11;2 
(R/C)max = L" :JPooCD,O.., 
! 
3 l ' 
W)2(L/ D)?riaxz .J I 
Equation 16) demonstrates that the a 
determining (R/ C)max· Also note from Eqs. 
wing loading, everything else being increases both V(R/CJm,, and 
Indeed both V(R/Clmax and (R/C)max are proportional to ,./W/S. 
of increasing altitude on can be seen from 
decreases wit.h. increasing altitude according to T e< p00 for a 
for a turbofan, Eq. (5.1 shows that V(R/CJm,, is increased 
However, Eq. (5.1 clearly shows that being dominated 
to-weight ratio, decreases with an increase in altitude. 
Consider the case of a propeller-driven with the power available 17prP 
essentially constant. From Eq. (5.80) we can write 
maximum excess power 
117] 
w 
For a propeller-driven airplane with power available constant with veloc­
ity, the condition for maximum rate of climb is clearly seen in Fig. which is an 
elaboration of Fig. 5.33a. For this case, maximum excess power, hence 
occurs at the flight velocity for minimum power The conditions for mini-
mum power required are discussed in Section 5.6.2. We have seen from 
that minimum power required occurs when the at 
the flight velocity at which this occurs is given 
the flight velocity for maximum rnte of dimb 
1/2 w\ 
-~-- ,' s 
; 
exJpre:ss1,on for the maximum rate of climb can be obtained 
·and t.1-iat T - -
-1 1 ! 
= J w 
119] 

===== PDF PAGE 290 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
t 
Maximum 
excess 
power 
Figure 5.36 Conditions for maximum rate of climb for a 
propeller-driven airplane with power 
available constant with Right velocity. 
Insert Eq. (5.118) into (5.119) to obtain (R/C)max· At the moment, we will make this 
insertion only for the terms inside the square brackets in Eq. (5.119)-a convenience 
that will soon become apparent. Equation (5.119) becomes 
T/p,P 
(R/C)max = W 
-~R c [! (W)-lc l:_ J K W + (W/S)2K J 
( I lm., 2p00 S D.o Poo 3Cv,o S p00 (2/p 00 )y'K/(3Cv.o)(W/S) 
which simplifies to 
T/prP [J KCv o y' J (R/C)max = W - V(R/Clmax - 3-· +3KCv.o [5.120] 
The last two tenns in Eq. ( 5 .120) combine as follows 
~ + ./3KCv,o = (~ + J3) JKCv.o = (~ + JJ) J4~Cv.o 
1/./3 + ./3 1 1.155 = = 2 (L/ D)max (L/ D)max 
Hence, Eq. (5.120) can be written as 
T/prP 1.155 
(R/C)max = W - V(R/Clm.,. (L/D)max [5.121] 
277 

===== PDF PAGE 291 =====
278 
Example 5.13 
PART 2 11, 
Finally, replacing V(R/Clmax in Eq. (5.121) with Eq. we 
driven airplane, 
I (R/C) ~ ry~P _ ~~) K (W)112 .155 
L max W Pco 3CD,O \ S · (L/ D)max 
22] 
Note from Eq. (5.122) that the dominant influence on is the power-
to-weight ratio rJprP / W. More power means a higher rate of climb-intuitively 
obvious. The effect of wing loading is secondary, but interesting. From Eq. ( 5. l 
V(R/Clmax increases with an increase in W / S. However, from Eq. (5. (Rf C)max 
decreases with an increase in W / S. This is in contrast to the case of a jet-propelled 
airplane, where from Eq. (5.116) an increased wing loading increases (R/C)max· 
Hence, propeller-driven airplanes are penalized in terms of (R/ C)max if have a 
high wing loading. Finally, the effect of increasing altitude is to increase and 
decrease ( R / C)max. Even for a supercharged reciprocating engine assuming constant 
rJprP / W with increasing altitude, Eq. (5.122) shows that (R/ C)max decreases with 
increasing altitude. 
!For the Gulfstream IV considered in the previous examples, do the following: (a) Calculate 
and plot the rate of climb versus velocity at sea level. Also plot the hodograph diagram. From 
these plots, graphically obtain Bma;o Vemax, (R/ C)max, and v(R/C)max at sea level. (b) Using the 
appropriate analytical expressions, calculate directly the values of Bmax, Vecnax, (R/ C)max, and 
V(R/Clmax at sea level. Compare the results obtained from the graphical and analytical solutions. 
Sol1.1tio111 
(a) Graphical solution. Rate of climb is calculated from (5.80), where the excess power is 
the difference between the maximum power available and the power required, or 
R/C = excess power= (PA)max - PR = _(T_A_)_ma_x_V:_00_-_-_D_V:_00_ 
w w w 
Here (TA)max = 27,700 lb and is constant; W = 73,000 lb. The powerrequired PR is calculated 
as shown in Example 5.7. In this example, we are at sea level, where p0 = 0.002377 slug/ft3 • 
See Table 5.4, page 279, for (PA)max, PR, and R/ Cat different values of V00 • 
Maximum power available, power required, and rate of climb are plotted versus velocity 
in Fig. 5.37. The hodograph diagram is shown in Fig. 5.38, where the same velocity scale is 
used on both axes. Using the same velocity scale produces a shallow hodograph curve, but this 
allows the measurement on Fig. 5.38 of the true angle for &max· 
The graphical. solutions given in Figs. 5.37 and 5.38 show that 
&max= 18° 
Vemax = 375 ftls 
(R/ C)max = 180 ftls 
= 750 ft/s I 
~~~~~~~·~___) 

===== PDF PAGE 292 =====
Table 5,4 
V oo (ftls) 
150 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
750 
800 
900 
1,000 
1,100 
1,200 
1,300 
4 
1 
X 3 
~ 
::e 
ei:: 2 
,_;' 
0) 
~ 0 Q, 
2 
Figure 5.37 
CHAPTER 5 1111 
(PA)mox (fMb/s) P11 (fMb/s) 
4.155 X 106 2.574 X J06 
5.540 X 106 2.023 X 106 
8.310 X 106 l.716 X !06 
l.!08 X 107 2.028 X 106 
1.385 X 107 2.872 X 106 
l.662 X 107 4.288 X 106 
1.939 X 107 6.348 X 106 
2.078 X 107 7.648 X 106 
2.216 X 107 9.143 X 106 
2.493 X 107 i.277 X 107 
2.770 X J07 J.731 X 107 
3.047 X !07 2.289 X 107 
3.324 X J07 2.958 X 107 
3.601 X 107 3.750 X 107 
4 6 8 lO 12 
Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
R/C (ftls) 
21.7 
48.2 
90.3 
124.0 
150.4 
168.9 
178.7 
179.8 
(essentially R/Cmax) 
178.3 
166.6 
142.3 
103.9 
50.l 
-20.4 
180 
160 
,, 140 
' s:: 120 
.0 .§ 100 
u 80 "'" 0 
0) 
60 
~ 40 
20 
0 2 4 
RIC = Excess power 
w 
6 8 10 
V~, ft/s X 10-2 
12 
Power available, power required, and rate of climb versus Hight velocily for the Gulfstream IV al 
sea level from Example 5.13. 
(b) Analytical solution. Data necessary for the analytical solution are 
!_ = 27,700 = 0.3795 
W 73,000 
W 73,000 - = -- =76.84 S 950 
Cv.o = O.Ql5 K = 0.08 
( !::__) = 14.43 (from Example 5.4) 
D max 
Poo = 0.002377slug/ft 3 (sea level) 
279 

===== PDF PAGE 293 =====
P A R T 2 e Airplane Performance 
4 -
' 0 2 I 4 6 8 10 12 
VH, ft/s X 1 o-Z 
figure 5.38 Hodograph diagram fur the Guifstream IV al sea level from Example 5.13. 
From Eq. (5.94), 
T 1 1 sineffia]( = - - = 0.3795 - -- = 0.3102 
W (L/ D)max 14.43 
Hence, 
I &max = 18.07° 
This result compares almost exactly with that obtained from the graphical solution, which is 
obtained by drawing in the tangent line shown in Fig. 5.38. 
From Eq. (5.98), 
2 ( K ) 112 W - -- - cos emax 
Poo Cv.o S 
= 2 r 0.08 ) 112 I 0.002377 \ 0,01 5 (76.84cos 18.07°) = 376.8 ftJs 
Again, this result agrees remarkably weli with the graphical solution. 
From Eq. (5.116), where 
Z = 1 + 3 l+ -1+ (LI D)~ax (T / W)2 -
3 
l + (14.43)2(0.3795) 2 = 2·0488 
we have 
[ (W/S)Zl 112 (T)312 [ Z 3 1 
(R/C)max = 3p00 Cv.oJ W . l - 6 - 2(T/W)2(L/D)~axzJ 
= [ 3<~~2~~~;~~~;; 5J 
112 
(0.3795) 312 
r 2.04ss 3 J 
x L l - ·-6- - 2(0.3795)2(14.43)2(2.0488) 
= (1,213.17)(0.23379)(1 - 0.34147 - 0.0244) = 1179.86 ft/s 
This agrees very well with the graphical solution. 

===== PDF PAGE 294 =====
CHAPTER 5 11> Airplane Performance: Steady Fl.ight 
From Eq. (5.112), 
1/2 
{ IT/ W;' (W/S) [ 3 11
1 ~ - \ ' l I 1 
(R/C)mex - 3 C T - + (L/D)2 (T/ W)2 I Poo D,O max J 
= [(T/W)(W/S)Zl 112 = f(0.379)(76.84)(2.0488)r 2 =I 
3p00 Cv,O J L 3(0.002377)(0.015) ..l 
747.36 ft/~ 
This result and that from the graphical solution agree very well. 
Comment: It is conventional in aeronautics to quote rate of climb in units of feet per 
minute. In the above calculations, we have quoted rate of climb in the consistent units of feet 
per second, because those are the units that follow directly from t..he physical equations. Of 
course, the conversion is trivial, and we note that fro:n the above results at sea level, 
I (R/ C)ma:x = 179.86 ft/s = 10,792 ft/min I 
We should note that a rate of climb on the order of 10,000 ft/min is quite high for a 
conventional subsonic executive jet transport. The calculated value of 10,792 ft/min is due 
mainly to the relatively high thrust-to-weight ratio for our sample airplane. For our sample 
airplane, the Gulfstream IV (T / W = 0.3795), whereas for more typical subsonic jet transports, 
the values of T / W are on the order of 0.25. Clearly, for the worked examples in this chapter, 
we are dealing with a "hot" airpiane. Also, note that the above calculation shows that this 
maximum rate of climb is achieved at a flight velocity of747.36 ft/s = 510 milb. This means 
that the airplane must already be flying at high speed at sea level to achieve the calculated 
(R/C)max· In actual practice, the airplane is at sea level at takeoff, and it enters its climb 
path at a much lower velocity than 510 mi/h. For example, at sea level the stalling velocity 
(from Example 5.12) is Vstall = 164.5 ft/s. This value was calculated for flaps fully deflected 
for landing. For takeoff, the flaps are only partially deployed to reduce the drag due to the 
flaps, and hence (Cdmax is smaller. From Table 5.3, we choose (Cdmax/cosA = 2.1 for 
takeoff, rather than the value of 2.7 used in Example 5.12 for landing. This increases Vs,au to 
(164.5)(2.7 /2.1) 112 = 187 ft/s. If we assume that a safe takeoff velocity is l.2Vs,all, then the 
airplane is flying at a velocity of 224 ft/s, or about 153 mi/h at takeoff. From Fig. 5.37, the 
unaccelerated rate of climb achievable by an airplane at this velocity is only 60 ft/s, or 3,600 
ft/min. This value is a much more realistic estimate of the climb performance at sea level than 
the calculated value of ( R / C)max. It is also more consistent with the data in Ref. 36 which 
quotes for the Gulfstream IV a sea-level rate of climb of 4,000 ft/min. 
DESIGN CAMEO 
Once again we call attention to the effect of the velocity 
variation of TA on the performance of the airplane. If 
we take into account this variation, the answer from 
Problem 5.20a gives the following results at sea level: 
(R/C)max = 5,028 ft/min 
V(R/C)m,x = 440 ft/s 
These are to be compared with (R/ C)max = 10,792 
ft/min and v(R/Clmax = 747.36 ftls obtained in Exam­
ple 5.13, which assumes that TA is constant with ve­
locity. Clearly, in the preliminary design process for 
a turbofan-powered airplane, it is essential to take into 
account the velocity variation of TA. 
21n 

===== PDF PAGE 295 =====
282 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
5. 10.3 Gliding (Unpowered) Flight 
Whenever an airplane is flying such that the power required is larger than the power 
available, it will descend rather than climb. In the ultimate situation, there is no power 
at all; in this case, the airplane will be in gliding, or unpowered, flight. This will occur 
for a conventional airplane when the engine quits during flight (e.g., engine failure 
or running out of fuel). Also, this is the case for unpowered gliders and sailplanes. 
(Raymer in Ref. 25 adds a "cultural note" that distinguishes between sailplanes and 
gliders. He stated the following on p. 471: "In sailplane terminology, a 'sailplane' 
is an expensive, high-performance unpowered aircraft. A 'glider' is a crude, low­
performance unpowered aircraft!") Gliding flight is a special (and opposite) case of 
our previous considerations dealing with climb; it is the subject of this subsection. 
The force dia_gram for an unpowered aircraft in descending flight is shown in 
Fig. 5.39. For steady, unaccelerated descent, where() is the equilibrium glide angle, 
L = Wcos() 
D = Wsin() 
[5.123] 
[5,124] 
The equilibrium glide angle is obtained by dividing Eq. (5.124) by Eq. (5.123). 
sin() D 
or 
cos() = L 
~ 
~ 
[5.125] 
Clearly, the glide angle is strictly a function of the lift-to-drag ratio; the higher the 
L/ D, the shallower the glide angle. From Eq. (5.125), the smallest equilibrium glide 
angle occurs at (L/ D)max· 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~­/ u 
1 
Tan ()min = (L/ D)max 
L 
Horizontal 
- -------r 
v u 
~ 
w 
Rateof ~ 
descent~ 
Figure 5.39 Force and velocity diagram for gliding Right. 
[5.126] 

===== PDF PAGE 296 =====
C H A P T E R 5 @ Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
For an aircraft at a given altitude h, this is the case for maximum horizontal distance 
covered over the ground (maximum range). This distance, denoted by R, is illustrated 
in Fig. 5.40 for a constant e. 
The simplicity reflected in Eqs. (5.125) and (5.126) is beautiful. The equilibrium 
glide angle e does not depend on altitude or wing loading, or the like; it simply depends 
on the lift-to-drag ratio. However, to achieve a given l/ D at a given altitude, the 
aircraft must fly at a specified velocity V 00 , called the equilibrium glide velocity, and 
this value of V 00 does depend on the altitude and wing loading, as follows. Since 
L = !Poo V!SCL 
Eq. (5.123) becomes 
or 
27] 
In Eq. (5.127), V00 is the equilibrium glide velocity. Clearly, it depends on altitude 
(through p00 ) and wing loading. The value of CL in Eq. (5.127) is that particular 
value which corresponds to the specific value of L/ D used in Eq. (5.125). Recall 
that both CL and L / D are aerodynamic characteristics of the aircraft that vary with 
angle of attack, as sketched in Fig. 5.41. Note from Fig. 5.41 that a specific value of 
L / D, say (L/ D) 1, corresponds to a specific angle of attack a 1, which in turn dictates 
the lift coefficient (CL) 1• If L / D is held constant throughout the glide path, then CL 
is constant along the glide path. However, the equilibrium velocity along this glide 
path will change with altitude, decreasing with decreasing altitude. 
LID 
Angle of attack 
Figure 5.40 Range covered in an equilibrium guide. Figure 5.4 i Sketch of !he variation of Cl and 
LID versus angle of attack for a 
given airplane. 
:283 

===== PDF PAGE 297 =====
284 
Example 5.14 
P ~ R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
Consider again the case for a minimum glide angle as treated by Eq. (5.126). 
For a typical modem airplane, (L/ D)max = 15, and for this case from Eq. (5.126), 
llmin = 3.8°-a small angle. Hence, we can reasonably assume cos O = 1 for such 
cases. Recall from Eq. (5.30) that 
[5.30] 
and for L = W (consistent with the assumption of cos O = 1), the velocity at which 
L/ Dis maximum is given by Eq. (5.34) 
[5.34] 
Hence, for llmin, the equilibrium velocity along the glide path is given by Eq. (5.34). 
Consider the Gulfstream IV flying at 30,000 ft. Assume a total loss of engine thrust. Calculate 
(a) the minimum glide path angle, (b) the maximum range covered over the ground, and (c) 
the corresponding equilibrium glide velocity at 30,000 ft and at sea level. 
Solution 
(a) From Eq. (5.126) 
1 
Tan Omin = (L/ D)max 
From Example (5.4), (L/ D)max = 14.43. Hence 
1 Tan Omin = 14.43 = 0.0693 
emin = 3.964° 
(b) From Fig. 5.40, 
h 
R =Tane 
Hence, 
R _ _ h _ _ 30,000 _ 30,000 -I _ . I 
max - , ·. e . - 1' e . - O 06 - 432,900 ft - 82 IIl1 lan nun an mm • 93 
(c) At 30,000 ft, Poo = 8.9068 x 10-4 slug/ft3 • From Eq. (5.34), 
V(L/D)max = (p:J C:,O ~r/2 = [8.90682X 10-4J0~~~85(76.84)J/2 =I 631.2ft/s 
At sea level, p00 = 0.002377 slug/ft3. Note that in Eq. (5.34), the only quantity that changes 

===== PDF PAGE 298 =====
C H A P T E R 5 @ Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
is Poo· Hence, we can write from Eq. (5.34), 
'/2 
[ V: ] _ f (Poo)30.ooo ft 1 · 
(L/ D)ma, sea level - L (p ) oo sea level J ft 
= (8.9068 X 10-4)1/2 '631.2 =I 
\ 0.002377 ~ ) . 386.4 ft/s 
The rate of descent, sometimes called the sink rate, is the downward vertical 
velocity of the airplane V v. It is, for unpowered flight, the analog of rate of climb for 
powered flight. As seen in the insert in Fig. 5.39, 
Rate of descent = V V = V 00 sin(} [5.128J 
Rate of descent is a positive number in the downward direction. Multiplying Eq. (5 .124) 
by V00 and inserting Eq. (5.128), we have 
or 
DV00 = WV00 sine= WVv 
DV00 
Vv=-­W 
[5.129] 
By making the assumption of cose = 1, in Eq. (5.129), DV00 is simply the power 
required for steady, level flight. Hence, the variation of Vv with velocity is the same 
as the power required curve, divided by the weight. This variation is sketched in 
Fig. 5.42, with positive values of Vv increasing along the downward vertical axis 
(just to emphasize that the sink rate Vv is in the downward direction). Clearly, 
minimum sink rate occurs at the flight velocity for minimum power required. Hence 
the conditions for minimum sink rate are the same as those for (PR)min, which from 
Eqs. (5.41) and (5.57) are 
L 
2. 
r3/2 
:::..L is maximum 
CD 
( 2 fKW)112 
(Voo)minsinkrate = Poo y ~--,OS 
The hodograph diagram is sketched in Fig. 5.43 where a line from the origin 
tangent to the hodograph curve defines Bruin· This sketch is shown just to emphasize 
that the minimum sink rate does not correspond to the minimum glide angle. The 
flight velocity for the minimum sink rate ( corresponding to maximum C~12 /CD) is 
less than that for minimum glide angle (corresponding to maximum CL/ Cv). 
An analytical expression for the sink rate Vv can be obtained as follows. From 
(5.123) 
285 

===== PDF PAGE 299 =====
P ~ R T 2 ~ Airplane Performance 
Equilibrium glide velocity V= --- Increasing VH --- Increasing 
Figure 5.42 
Example 5.15 
Minimum Vv Minimum Vv 
Rate of descent versus equilibrium guide 
velocity. 
Figure 5.43 Hodograph for unpowered 
Right. 
or 
2W cose 
PooSCL 
Substituting Eq. (5.130) into Eq. (5.128), we have 
2cose W 
Vv = V00 sine= (sine) --­
PooCL S 
Dividing Eq. (5.124) by Eq. (5.123), we obtain 
. D Cv sme = -cose = -case 
L CL 
Inserting Eq. (5.132) into Eq. (5.131), we have 
2cos 3 8 W 
Vv = 
Poo(Ci/Cb) S 
By making the assumption that cos e = 1, Eq. (5.133) is written as 
[.5.130] 
[S.132] 
[5.133] 
134] 
Equation (5.134) explicitly shows that (Vv )min occurs at (Ct /CD)max· It also shows 
that the sink rate decreases with decreasing altitude and increases as the square root 
of the wing loading. 
For the unpowered Gulfstream IV at 30,000 ft, calculate (a) the sink rate for the case of minimum 
glide angle and (b) the minimum sink rate. 

===== PDF PAGE 300 =====
C H A P T E R 5 ® Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
S0h.1tio11 
(a) From Example 5.14, 6mm = 3.964° and = 631.2 ft/s. Hence, 
Vv=(V 00 ) 8 sin6min=63!.2sin3.964°=l 43.6ft/s mm 
(b) From Example 5.4, (Ct /CD)max = 10.83. Hence from Eq. (5.134), 
(Vv )min= 
2 W 
Poo(CUCb)max S 
2(76.84) 
(8.9068 X lQ- 4 )(10.83)2 
2(76.84) = I 38.6 ft/s J 
(8.9068 X 10- 4 )(10.83)2 
Note that, as expected, the minimum sink rate of 38.6 ft/sis smaller than the sink rate of 43.6 
ft/s for minimum glide angle. 
Glider pilots take advantage of the different sink rates discussed above. When flying 
through an upward-lifting thermal, they fly at the velocity for minimum sink rate, so as to gain 
the greatest altitude. Out of the thermal, they accelerate to the flight velocity for minimum 
glide angle in order to cover the greatest distance before encountering the next thermal.. 
5.11 SERVICE AND ABSOLUTE CEILINGS 
How high can an airplane fly in steady, level flight? The answer is straightforward­
that altitude where the maximum rate of climb is zero is the highest altitude achiev­
able in steady, level flight. This altitude is defined as the absolute ceiling, that is, 
that altitude where (R/ C)max = 0. A more useful quantity is the service ceiling, 
conventionally defined as that altitude where (R/C)max = 100 ft/min. The service 
ceiling represents the practical upper limit for steady, level flight. 
The absolute and service ceilings are denoted in Fig. 5.44, which also illustrates 
a simple graphical technique for finding these ceilings. In Fig. 5.44, the maximum 
rate of climb (on the abscissa) is plotted versus altitude (on the ordinate); for many 
conventional airplanes, this variation is almost (but not precisely) linear. The graphical 
solution for service and absolute ceilings is straightforward. For a given airplane: 
1. Calculate ( R / C)max at a number of different altitudes. This calculation can be 
made by either the graphical or analytical solution discussed in Section 5.10. 
2. Plot the results in the fonn shown in Fig. 5.44. 
3. Extrapolate the curve to a value of (R/C)max = 100 ft/min, denoted by point 1 
in Fig. 
5.44. The c01Tesponding value of h at point 1 is the service ceiling. 
4. Extrapolate the curve to a value of (R / C)max = 0, denoted by point 2 in 
Fig. 
5.44. The corresponding value of hat 2 is the service ceiling. 
An analytical solution is also straightforward. For a jet-propelled airplane, 
(R/C)max is giv~n Eq. (5. The free-stream density p00 appears explicitly 
in the first term and implicitly through the altitude va..1iation of T. By inserting 
(R/C)max = 0 in the left-hand side ofEq. (5.116), p00 can be obtained by solving 
287 

===== PDF PAGE 301 =====
Example 5.16 
PART 2 @ Airplane Performance 
hi 
I 
I I 
i I 
0 
Absolute ceiling 
Service ceiling 
(RIC 
Figure 5.44 Sketch of variation of maximum rate of climb with 
altitude, illustrating absolute and service ceilings. 
Eq. (5.116) by a trial-and-error, iterative process. In turn, this value of p00 will define 
the standard altitude at which (R/C)max = 0, that is, the absolute ceiling. A similar 
process, wherein (R/ C)max = 100 ft/min = 1.67 ft/s is inserted in the left-hand 
side of Eq. ( 5 .116), leads to a solution for the service ceiling. For a propeller-driven 
airplane, the absolute and service ceilings can be obtained from Eq. 122) by means 
of a similar trial-and-error solution. 
For the Gulfstream IV discussed in previous examples, plot the variation of (R/ C)max versus 
altitude, and use this curve to graphically obtain the absolute ceiling. Also plot the variation 
of V(R/C)max VefSUS altitude. 
Solution 
Equation (5.116) is used to calculate (R/C)max at different altitudes from sea level to 60,000 
ft, in increments of 2,000 ft. Similarly, Eq. (5.112) is used to calculate at the same 
altitudes. The data that are inserted in Eqs. (5.l 12) and (5.116) are the same as those used 
in Example 5.3, part (b), except that the appropriate values of p00 are used for the different 
altitudes, as obtained from Appendix B. The following is an abridged tabulation of the results. 
h (ft) (RICJmax (ft/s) V(R/C)max (ft!s) 
0 179.9 747.4 
10,000 156.6 798.0 
20,000 133.8 858.3 
30,000 111.0 931.9 
40,000 85.9 1,033.4 
50,000 58.2 1,176.6 
60,000 30.1 1,358.7 

===== PDF PAGE 302 =====
8 
7 
CHAPTER 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
6 
I 
I 
-<: 4 
.g 
a 3 ·c 
Altitude at 
whichM~= I 
Al 
,-Machi 
\ 
:;;: 2 " "O 
32 ·c 
,_ Speed of sound as 
a function of h 
:;;: I 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 
Maximum rate of climb, ft/s 
0 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
'(RIC)max' ft/s 
(a) Altitude variation of maximum rate of climb (b) Altitude variation of velocity for maximum rate of climb 
Figure 5.45 Variations of maximum rate of climb and the corresponding velocity with altitude, from Example 5. 16. 
All the calculated results are plotted in Fig. 5.45. In Fig. 5.45a, (R/ C)max is plotted versus 
altitude, and in Fig. 5.45b the corresponding V<R/C)m" is shown versus altitude. The results in 
Fig. 5.45a are extrapolated.to (R/ C)max = 0, yielding 
Absolute ceiling = 70,000 ft 
This is the theoretical result based on the conventional drag polar for our given airplane. This, 
in combination with the high T / W for the Gulfstream IV, yields an inordinately high value for 
the absolute ceiling. In reality, an absolute ceiling of 70,000 ft will never be achieved, because 
compressibility effects become important at the higher altitudes. How does this happen? 
For an answer, recall that V(R/Clmax increases with altitude; indeed, this is clearly seen 
in Fig. 5.45b, where the solid curve is the plot of V(R/Clmax versus altitude. Also shown in 
Fig. 5.45b is the variation of the free-stream speed of sound versus altitude, given for a limited 
range by the dashed line in Fig. 5.45b. At the intersection of these two curves, labeled point 
A, the flight velocity equals the speed of sound; that is, the airplane goes through Mach 1. For 
the present conditions, this occurs at an altitude of about 35,000 ft. For higher altitudes, where 
the present calculations predict an even higher velocity, drag-divergence effects will prevail. 
Hence, in reality the flight velocity will remain subsonic. Our present calculations do not 
include the drag-divergence effect, and hence the calculations for altitudes above 35,000 ft do 
not reflect the real situation. That is, in Fig 5.45a and b, the results at altitudes above 35,000 ft 
(above point A) are ramifications of our conventional drag polar without drag divergence, and 
hence are of academic interest only. Their purpose here is only to help illustrate the conventional 
technique. In reality, above 35,000 ft, drag divergence will prevent the airplane from flying at 
the theoretical velocity required to obtain maximum rate of climb. Hence, it will climb at a 
lower R / C, and the absolute ceiling will be less, indeed in the present calculation much less, 
than the absolute ceiling of 70,000 ft/s predicted in Fig. 5.45a. The practical absolute ceiling 
will not be much higher than 35,000 ft. In Ref. 36, the maximum operating altitude of the 
Gulfstream IV is li~ted as 45,000 ft. 
289 

===== PDF PAGE 303 =====
290 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
DESIGN CAMEO 
The answer from Problem 5.23, taking into account 
the velocity variation of TA, gives for the absolute ceil­
ing a value of 43,760 ft. This is considerably lower than 
the value of 70,000 ft calculated in Example 5.16. This 
is yet another graphical de'T!onstration of the need to 
properly account for the velocity variation of TA in the 
preliminary design of turbofan-powered airplanes. 
5.12 TIME TO CLIMB 
The rate of climb, by definition, is the vertical component of the airplane's velocity, 
which is simply the time rate of change of altitude dh/dt. Hence, 
dh -=R/C dt 
or 
dt = _!!!!_ 
R/C 
[5.135) 
In Eq. (5.135), R/C is a function of altitude, and dt is the small increment in time 
required to climb the small height dh at a given instantaneous altitude. The time 
to climb from one altitude h 1 to another h2 is obtained by integrating Eq. (5.135) 
between the two altitudes: 
1
h2 dh 
t = hi R/C [5.136] 
Normally, the performance characteristic labeled time to climb is considered from sea 
level, where h 1 = 0. Hence, the time to climb from sea level to any given altitude h2 
is, from Eq. (5.136), 
t = rh2 _!!!!_ 
Jo R/C 
[5.137) 
If in Eq. (5.137) the maximum rate of climb is used at each altitude, then t 
becomes the minimum time to climb to altitude h2• 
[5.138) 
5. 12. 1 Graphical Approach 
Consider a plot of (Rf C)- 1 versus altitude, as shown in Fig. 5.46. The time to climb 
to altitude h2 is simply the area under the curve, shown by the shaded area in Fig. 5 .46. 

===== PDF PAGE 304 =====
Figure 5.46 
C H A P T E R 5 e Airpllme Performance: Steady Flight 
Altitude h 
Graphical representation of ihe time to dimb 
lo altitude h2, 
Using a. 1phical approach, calculate the minimum time to climb to 30,000 ft for the Gulfstream 
IV baseo 0n the data from previous examples. 
S0h.1tion 
The integral in Eq. (5.138) can be numerically evaluated by dividing the area shown in Fig. 5.46 
into a large number of small vertical segments of width tlh and local height equal to (R/ C)- 1• 
The area of each segment is then 6.h/(R/ C). In tum, 
1
h2 dh n ( b,,h ) 
t- -~I:-- o R/C i=l R/C ; 
[5,139] 
where n is the number of segments chosen. Since in Example 5.16 we calculated (R/ C)max at 
every 2,000-ft interval, for convenience we choose here Lih = 2,000 ft. Also, for (R/ C); in 
Eq. (5.139), we use an average value of the rate of climb for each segment. For example, for 
the first segment from h = 0 to h = 2,000 ft, 
2,000 
! [(R/C)o + (R/Ch,ooo] 
For the second segment, 
2,000 
! [(R/Ch,ooo + (R/C)4,ooo] 
and so forth. When this is carried out over the 15 segments from h = 0 to h2 = 30,000 ft, 
using the values of (R/C)max calculated in Example 5.16, we have 
1
30.000 dh 15 [ 2.000 J I tmin = 0 = I: = 210.s s = 3.s1 min 
(R/C)max i=I (R/C)max i ~---~ 
Example 5. 17 

===== PDF PAGE 305 =====
292 
Example 5.18 
P A R T 2 a Airplane Performance 
Note: The minimum time to climb to 30,000 ft of 3.51 min calcurated here is small because 
(R/C)mn. has been used at each altitude, and we already noted in the discussion following 
Example 5.13 that the actual airplane would have val.ues of rate of climb lower than 
5. 12.2 Analytical Approach 
The governing relation for time to climb is given by Eq. (5.136), with the minimum 
time to climb given by Eq. (5.138). There is no exact analytical formula fort that can 
be obtained from these equations because of the nonlinear variation of rate of climb 
with altitude. However, examination of Fig. 5.45a shows that, in an approximate 
fashion, the variation of (R/ C)max is nearly linear with altitude. If we make the 
approximation, we can write 
(R/C)max =a+ bh [S.140] 
where h is altitude, a is the h = 0 intercept on the abscissa in Fig. 5.45a, and bis the 
slope of the approximate linear curve. Substituting Eq. (5. into Eq. (5.138), we 
have 
t . - {h' dh 
nun - Jo a+ bh 
l 
b 
(a+ bh 2 ) - Ina] [5.141] 
Using the analytical approach described above, calculate the minimum time to climb to 30,000 
ft for the Gulfstream IV, and compare your answer to the graphical result from Example 5 .17. 
Solution 
To find the values of a and bin Eq. (5.140), refer to Fig. 5.45a; or better yet, see the table in 
Example 5.16, where 
a = 179.9 ft/s 
Let us approximate the slope b by using the values of (R/C)max at 20,000 and 50,000 ft (a 
rather arbitrary choice), which are 133.8 and 58.2 ft/s, respectively. 
58.2 - 133.8 I 
b = = -2.52 X S-
50,000 - 20,000 
Hence, the form ofEq. (5.140) used for this example is 
(R/ C)max = 179.9 - 2.52 X 10- 3 h 
[Note that, just as a check, the above relation evaluated at h = 10,000 ft gives (R/C)max = 
154.7 ft/s. The exact value from the table in Example 5.16 is (R/C)max = 156.6 ft/s. Our 
approximate linear curve is accurate to within 1.2% at this altitude.] From Eg. (5.141), we 
have 

===== PDF PAGE 306 =====
C H A P T E R 5 <!I Airplane Penormance; Steady Flight 
1 
trrJn = b[ln (a+ bh2) - lna] 
1 {In [179.9 - (2.52 x 10- 3)(30,000)] - In 179.9} -2.52 X 10- 3 
= 216.3 s = [ 3.61 min I 
This is to be compared to the graphical result of tmin = 3.51 min obtained from Example 5.17. 
Our approximate analytical cakulation agrees to within 2.8%. 
5.13 RANGE 
Imagine that you are getting ready to fly across the Atlantic Ocean, say, leaving Dulles 
airport in Washington, D.C., and flying to Heathrow airport near London. You may 
be going for business or pleasure, but in either case, when you step on the airplane 
and it takes off, you will not touch land again until you have covered the 3,665 mi 
between Dulles and Heathrow. You take for granted that the airplane can cover this 
distance without running out of fuel. Indeed, the aeronautical engineers who designed 
the airplane made certain that you will cover this distance on one load of fuel. They 
designed the airplane to have enough range to cross the Atlantic and get you safely 
to London. 
How did they do this? What airplane 
design features and operating parameters 
ensure that you will cover enough distance to arrive safely at Heathrow? The general 
answer to this question is the subject of this section. 
By definition, range is the total distance (measured •,vith respect to the ground) 
traversed by an airplane on one load of fuel. We denote the range by R. We also 
consider the following weights: 
Wo-gross weight of the airplane including everything; full fuel load, payload, 
crew, structure, etc. 
W 1-weight of fuel; this is an instantaneous value, and it changes as fuel is 
consumed during flight. 
W1 -weight of the airplane when the fuel tanks are empty. 
At any instant during the flight, the weight of the airplane W is 
[5.1 
Since W 1 is decreasing during the flight, W is also decreasing. Indeed, the time rate 
of change of weight is, from Eq. (5. 
dW dWr . ____ , -w 
dt - dt - f [5. 143] 
293 

===== PDF PAGE 307 =====
294 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
where both d W / d t and Wt are negative numbers because 'fuel is being consumed, 
and hence both W and Wt are decreasing. 
Range is intimately connected with engine performance through the specific 
fuel consumption, defined in Chapter 3. For a propeller-driven/reciprocating engine 
combination, the specific fuel consumption is defined by Eq. (3.37), repeated in a 
slightly different form here: 
Wt C=--p [5.144) 
where Pis the shaft power and the minus sign is necessary because Wt is negative 
and c is always treated as a positive quantity. For a jet-propelled airplane, the thrust 
specific fuel consumption is defined by Eq. (3.38), repeated in a similarly modified 
form here: 
Wt c,=--T [5.145) 
where Tis the thrust available. However, as shown in Section 3.7, c can be expressed 
in terms of c1 and vice versa, via Eq. (3.43), repeated here: 
cV00 
c,=-­
Tlpr 
[3.43] 
where Tlpr is the propeller efficiency. Equation (3.43) is particularly useful for gener­
ating an equivalent "thrust" specific fuel consumption for propeller-driven airplanes. 
It is useful to review these matters from Section 3.7 before going fl\rther. 
A general relation for the calculation of range can be obtained as fol\ows. Con­
sider an airplane in steady, level flight. Let s denote horizontal distance covered over 
the ground. Assuming a stationary atmosphere (no wind), the airplane's velocity V 00 
is 
ds V: - -
OO - dt 
or 
ds = V00 dt 
Return to Eq. (5.145), from which 
dWtfdt 
Cr=-
T 
or 
dWt dt =--­
CrT 
Substitute Eq. (5.147) into Eq. (5.146). 
[5.146) 
[5.147) 
[5.148) 

===== PDF PAGE 308 =====
C H A P T E R 5 ® Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
From Eq. (5.142), dW1 = dW. Equation (5.148) then becomes 
V: V W dW ds=-~dW=-~--
c1T c1 T W [5.149] 
In steady, level flight, L = Wand T = D. Hence Eq. (5. can be written as 
ds = - Voo !:.._ dW [S.UO] 
Ct D w 
The range of the airplane is obtained integrating Eq. (5.150) betweens = 0, where 
the fuel tanks are full and hence W = W0 , ands = R, where the fuel tanks are empty 
and hence W = W1• 
or 
where W0 is the gross weight (with full fuel tanks) and W1 is the weight with the fuel 
tanks empty. Equation (5.151) is a general equation for range; the only restriction is 
for steady, level flight with no headwinds or tailwinds. Equation (5.151) holds for 
a jet-propelled airplane with c1 given directly by the engine performance, and for a 
propeller-driven airplane with a reciprocating engine, where an effective Ct can be 
obtained from c via Eq. (3.43). 
Some parameters that influence range are clearly evident from Eq. 15 Not 
surpisingly, range is influenced by the lift-to-drag ratio, specific fuel consumption, 
velocity, and the initial amount of fuel (the difference between W0 and W1). However, 
these parameters are not all independent of one another. For example, L / D depends 
on angle of attack, which depends on V 00 , W, and altitude. For a given flight, if the 
variation of L/ D, V00 , c1 , and Ware known throughout the duration of the flight, 
then Eq. (5.151) can be numerically integrated to exactly calculate the range. 
For a preliminary 
performance analysis, Eq. (5.151) is usually simplified. Ifwe 
assume flight at constant V00 , Ct, and L/ D, Eq. (5.151) becomes 
R = V00 !:.._ {Wo dW 
c, D Jw, W 
or 
Voo L Wo R=--ln-
c1 D W1 
Equation (5.152) is frequently called the Breguet range equation, although the earliest 
form of the Breguet equation appeared at the end of World War I and was written in 
a slightly different form pertaining directly to propeller-driven airplanes with recip­
rocating engines. We will address such matters in Section 5.13. L 

===== PDF PAGE 309 =====
PART 2 <l A11:n11me Performa.vice 
At first glance, it would appear from Eq. 
range, we would want to at ti'"ie 
largest possible value of L / D. 
high aerodynawjc efficiency (high 
L / D are not independent. Keep in mind that for a airplane varies with 
angle of attack, which in tum changes as changes ill level flight. Hence, is a 
function of in this case. From Eq. to obtain maximum range, we need to 
at a condition where the V00 (L/ D) is maximized. Th.is condition is different 
for propeller-driven and jet-propelled and therefore we must consider each 
category of aircraft in tum. This is the of the next two subsections. 
5.1 1 Range Airplanes 
~v."J'~"''!J-"'VH for propeller/reciprocating 
engine power plants is expressed in terms of power and is by 
Hence, it is convenient to express the range for propeller-driven 
in terms of the fuel c, rather than the thrust 
or 
Equation 
1920. 
range: 
L 
2. Have the 
3. 
4. Have the 
of 
The 
c1 • The relation between c and Ct is given by Eq. Hence, 
conditions associated with 
L -ln­
D 
ratio on range for a 
how do you ob­
for maximum 
carry a lot 
have been discussed in Section 
5.4.1. It follows that the theoretical maximum range for a 
is obtained at the where zem-lift 

===== PDF PAGE 310 =====
CHAPTER 5 @ Performance: Steady Flight 
that is, from Eq. (5.28) 
This is Eq. 
The value of maximum ratio is given Eq. 
= J 4C:.oK 
5.1 Range Jet~P:ropeHed Airplanes 
The simplified range equation for a jet-propelled airplane is 
which is written directly in tenns of the thrust specific fuel Ct. 
maximum range for a is not dictated by maximum L/ D, but rather the maximum 
value of the product Let us examine this product For level flight, 
or 
= J P~;c~ 
Thus, 
[S.1 
Thus the product V ocoCL/ D) is maximum when the airplane is flying at a maxi.mum 
l fc l/2/~ va ue o L Lv. 
Using Eq. we obtain a more explicitly useful expression for the range of 
Since (5.154) involves W, and 1 has already 
R= 
Assuming Ct, p00 , S, and 
I R= --
we have to return to the range 
into (5.151) 
Wo 1 r2W- ct dW 
·-·,1--·-· .-
Ct V w 
dW 
w112 
can be written as 
297 

===== PDF PAGE 311 =====
298 p A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
or 
[5.156] 
Equation (5.156) is a simplified range equation for a jet-propelled airplane. From 
this equation, the flight conditions for maximum range for a jet-propelled airplane are 
1. Fly at maximum c? /Cv. 
2. Have the lowest possible thrust specific fuel consumption. 
3. Fly at high altitude, where p00 is small. 
4. Carry a lot of fuel. 
Note that Eq. (5.153) for the range of a propeller-driven airplane does not explicitly 
depend on p00 , and hence the influence of altitude appears only implicitly via the 
altitude effects on IJpr and c. However, p00 appears directly in Eq. (5.156) for the 
range of a jet-propelled airplane, and hence the altitude has a first-order effect on 
range. This explains why, in part, when you fly in your jumbo jet across the Atlantic 
Ocean to London, you cruise at altitudes above 30,000 ft instead of skimming across 
the tops of the waves. Of course, Eq. (5.156), when taken in the limit of p00 going to 
zero, shows the range going to infinity. As you might expect, this is nonsense. The 
highest altitude that a given airplane can reach is limited by its absolute ceiling, and 
flight near the absolute ceiling does not yield maximum range. 
The flight conditions associated with ( C l12 /CD )max have been discussed in Sec­
tion 5.4.1. It follows that the theoretical maximum range for a jet-propelled airplane 
is obtained by flying at the velocity where the zero-lift drag is 3 times the drag due to 
lift, that is, wher~ 
Cv,o = 3KCz [5.43] 
The velocity is given by Eq. (5.45). 
V ,12 - (2_ j3K W)112 
(CL /Co)max - Poo v c;;;- S [5.45] 
The value of (Ct /Cv)max is given by Eq. (5.44). 
(c112) 3 ( 1 ) 114 
~D max= 4 3KCb.o 
[5.44] 
Recall from Section 5.4.1 that the velocity for (Ct /Cv)max is 1.32 times that for 
(L/ D)max· Reflecting on the product V00 (L/ D) in Eq. (5.152), we see that for max­
imum range for a jet, although the airplane is flying such that L/ D is less than its 
maximum value, the higher V 00 is a compensating factor. 

===== PDF PAGE 312 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
Estimate the maximum range at 30,000 ft for the Gulfstream IV. Also calculate the flight velocity 
required to obtain this range. The maximum usable fuel weight is 29,500 lb. The thrust specific 
fuel consumption of the Rolls-Royce Tay turbofan at 30,000 ft is 0.69 lb of fuel consumed per 
hour per pound of thrust. 
Solution 
From Example 5.4, 
I c'12) I _L_ = 25 
\ Co max 
and 
v(c'l2;r ) = 830.8 ft/s (at 30,000 ft) L ~D max 
Also, at 30,000 ft, p00 = 8.9068 x 10-4 slug/ft 3 . From the given fuel weight, we have 
W1 = W0 - w1 = 73,000 - 29,500 = 43,500 lb. The thrust specific fuel consumption in 
consistent units (seconds, not hours) is 
From Eq. (5.156), 
0.69 -4 -] 
C,- = -- = 1.917 X 10 S 
3,600 
2 R = _ ____ L_(w112 _ w1121 = ____ _ 2V'z c112 2 
1 Pcx,S Co O · 1 ' 1.917 X 10-4 (8.9068 X 10-4 )(950) 
In terms of miles, 
X 25[(73,QOO)l/Z - (43,500) 112] = 2.471 X 107 ft 
R -- 2.471 X 107 --1 I 4,680 mi 
5,280 . 
The use of Eq. (5.156) generally leads to an overestimation of the actual range, for reasons to 
be given in the next subsection. According to Ref. 36, the maximum range of the Gulfstream 
IV is 4,254 mi; in this case the above calculation gives a reasonable estimate of the actual 
range. 
The velocity for maximum range has already been quoted at the beginning of this example, 
as obtained from Example 5.4. It is the velocity at 30,000 ft at which the airplane is ll.ying at 
(Ci12 /Cv)max· 
V00 (max. range)= 830.8 ft/s = [ 566 mi/h I 
This velocity is close to the cruising speed at 31,000 ft of 586 mi/has listed in Ref. 36 for the 
real Gulfstream IV. 
5. 13.3 Other Considerations 
There is a contingency in the assumption that led to Eqs. (5.152), (5.153), and (5.156), 
that is, the assumption that V 00 , L / D, and C Y2 /CD are constant throughout the flight. 
During the flight, fuel is being consumed, and therefore W is decreasing. Since 
Example 5, 19 

===== PDF PAGE 313 =====
300 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
L = W throughout the flight and 
L = W = !Pc,o V~SCL (5.157] 
then the right-hand side ofEq. (5.157) must decrease during the flight. Because of the 
assumption that L / D or C 112 /CD is constant, the angle of attack remains constant, 
and hence CL is constant. Since V 00 is also assumed constant, the only quantity on 
the right-hand side of Eq. ( 5 .157) that can change is p00 • Therefore, the contingency 
in our assumptions is that as the flight progresses and fuel is consumed, the altitude 
must be continuously increased in just the right manner so that CL remains constant 
as W decreases. To take the conditions of Example 5 .19 as a case in point, at the start 
of the flight, CL is given by 
c L = w = -,-----7_3,_o_oo ____ = 0_25 
!Poo V~S !(8.9068 X I0-4)(830.8)2(950) 
At the end of the flight, when W = 43,500 lb, the value of p00 necessary to keep 
CL = 0.25 is 
Poo = 2C43,500) = 5.307 x 10-4 slu /ft3 
(830.8)2 (950)(0.25) g 
This density corresponds to a standard altitude of about 42,000 ft. Hence, for the 
conditions of Example 5.19, the airplane starts out at an altitude of 30,000 ft, but 
must continually climb and will end up at an altitude of 42,000 ft in order to keep V 00 
and CL (hence C Y2 /CD) constant. Of course, this changing of altitude compromises 
the use of a fixed value of p00 in the range equation for a jet airplane, Eq. (5.156). 
The range equation for a propeller-driven airplane, Eq. (5.153), does not contain p00 
and hence is not compromised in the same manner. 
Air traffic control constraints do not usually allow an airplane to constantly in­
crease its altitude during the flight, and hence at constant velocity the airplane is 
generally flying off its maximum value of L/ D or cl12 /CD, as the case may be. 
However, on long flights, such as across the Atlantic Ocean, you may note that from 
time to time the pilot will put the airplane into a short climb to higher altitude. This 
"stairstepping" flight profile helps to increase the range. 
Equations (5.152), (5.153), and (5.156) are useful for preliminary performance 
estimates for range. However, it is important to keep the above comments in mind 
when you interpret the results. Also, these equations do not account for takeoff, 
ascent to altitude, descent, and landing. 
There are other scenarios for the calculation of range, such as constant-altitude 
constant-velocity flight (where the value of CL changes, hence L/ D and cyz /CD 
change), and constant-altitude constant-CL flight (where the value of V 00 changes). 
These scenerios lead to predictions of maximum range that are less than the constant­
velocity constant-CL scenario (the cruise-climb scenario) we have treated here. For a 
more in-depth discussion of various range scenarios, see the books of Hale (Ref. 49) 
and Mair and Birdsall (Ref. 41). 

===== PDF PAGE 314 =====
CHAPTER 5 @ Performance: Flight 
Another consideration has to do with the necessary for maximum 
range. In 5. l 9, this high the 
calculated velocity of 830.8 ft/s is equivalent to Mach 0.84. what happens 
when the for maximum range turns out to be a fairly low value, 
below the maximum This would correspond to a low power 
setting for the engine-it would be throttled back To at such low 
power hence low would result in an inordinately long time to 
arrive at the destination. Instead, the cruise is set at some value in 
order to realize the full performance capability of the airpiane, even though the range 
is reduced. This is to your automobile on the highway. Your 
best fuel economy, that is, miles per gallon, usually occurs at a speed of between 
40 and 50 mi/h. However, you will drive at the posted speed say, 65 in 
order to shorten your even you will burn more gas to get to your 
destination. In the case of an airplane, to at higher velocity than that for maximum 
range is not as inefficient as one might think. For example, return to Fig. 5.11 where 
the aerodynamic ratios, including C Li CD and C 112 /CD, are plotted versus velocity. 
Note that the maximum values are relatively flat peaks, and the values of CL/CD and 
C 112 /CD at speeds of at least 200 ft/s faster are still fairly close to their maximum 
values. Although Fig. 5.11 is for a specific case, it is representative of the general 
situation. Even though a penalty in range is by flying faster than the best-range 
spec: the penalty is usually small and does not outweigh the advantage of a shorter 
flight time, 
Related to the above considerations, Bernard Carson, a professor of aerospace 
engineering at the US Naval Academy, suggested another figure of merit that com­
bines the concept of long range and higher velocity (Ref. 5 Maximum range occurs 
when the number of pounds of fuel consumed per mile is minimized. Recognizing 
that the flight velocity at this condition could be too small for practical situations, 
Carson reasoned that a more appropriate combination of both speed and economy 
would be flight in which the number of pounds of fuel consumed per unit of velocity 
were minimized, that is, when 
'dW I 
I fl. . . ---is a m1mmum 
Voo 
Let us consider a propeJJer-driven airplane, which was the focus of Carson's study. 
From Eq. (5. 
dWt = -- = -cP dt 
or 
= -cPdt [5. 158] 
Since V00 = ds/dt and P = T Eq. (5.158) can be written as 
cPds cTVcx; ds ---- = -cTds [5.159] 
301 

===== PDF PAGE 315 =====
302 P A R T 2 111 Airplane Performance 
By using Eq. (5.159), Carson's figure of merit becomes 
ldW1I = _!_eds 
Vco Vco 
[5.160] 
Clearly, this figure of merit is minimized when T / V co is a minimum. We examine 
the aerodynamic condition that holds when T / V co is a minimum, keeping in mind 
that T = D and L = W. 
T D D L [S.161] 
Voo Vco L Vco CL Voo 
From the expression for lift L = W = !Poo V~SCL, we have 
[5.162] 
Substituting Eq. (5.162) into Eq. (5.161), we obtain 
_!_ = CDW J PooSCL = CD / p00 SW 
Voo CL , 2W cll2 2 
[5.163] 
From Eq. (5.163), minimum T / V00 occurs when the airplane is flying such that 
CD/ C l12 is a minimum, hence when C l12 /CD is a maximum. We have already seen 
in Section 5.4.1 that the velocity for (Cl 12/CD)max is given by Eq. (5.45), and that 
this velocity is 1.32 times the velocity for (L/ D)max· 
In short, to fly at the minimum number of pounds of fuel consumed per unit of 
velocity, the propeller-driven airplane must fly at ( C l12 /CD )max. The corresponding 
velocity is faster than that for ( L / D )max. This velocity has come to be called Carson's 
speed in parts of the aeronautical community: 
Carson's speed = 1.32 V(L/ D)m"' 
For the reasons mentioned earlier, Carson's speed is certainly a more practical cruise 
speed for propell.er-driven airplanes than the lower speed for maximum L / D, although 
the resulting range will be less than the maximum possible range. Carson himself has 
put it quite succinctly: flight at this speed is "the least wasteful way of wasting fuel." 
5.14 ENDURANCE 
Imagine that you are on an air surveillance mission, on the watch for ground or sea 
activity of various sorts, or monitoring the path and characteristics of a hurricane. 
Your main concern is staying in the air for the longest possible time. You want the 
airplane to have long endurance. By definition, endurance is the amouJ'l.t of time that 
an airplane can stay in the air on one load of fuel. 
The flight conditions for maximum endurance a.re different from ;Uwse for max­
imum range, discussed in the previous section. Also, the parameters' for endurance 

===== PDF PAGE 316 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
are different for propeller-driven and jet-propelled airplanes. Let us consider these 
matters in more detail. 
From Eq: (5.145), 
or 
dWt -- =-c,T dt 
dt = -dW1 
c1T (5.164] 
Since T = D and L = Win steady, level flight, Eq. (5.164) can be written as 
dt = - dWt = _ _£_!_ dW1 
c1 D De, W (5.165] 
Integrating Eq. (5.165) from t = 0, where W = Wo, tot= E, where W = W 1, we 
have 
E - - f W1 _!_ L dW1 = f Wo _!__£ dWt 
Jw0 c, D W Jw1 c, D W 
(5.166] 
Equation ( 5 .166) is the general equation for the endurance E of an· airplane. If the 
detailed variations of c1, L/ D, and W are known throughout the flight, Eq. (5.166) 
can be numerically integrated to obtain an exact result for the endurance. ' 
For preliminary performance analysis, Eq. (5.166) is usually simplified. If we 
assume flight at constant c1 and L/ D, Eq. (5.166) becomes 
or 
E = _!__£ f Wo dW1 
Ct D fw1 W 
1 L Wo E=--ln­c,D W1 (5.167] 
Let us consider the individual cases of propeller-driven and jet-propelled aircraft. 
5.14.1 Endurance for Propeller-Driven Airplanes 
The specific fuel consumption for propeller-driven airplanes is given in terms of power 
rather than thrust. From Eq. (3.43), the relation between c and c1 is 
cVoo c,=--
7/pr 
Substituting this relation into Eq. (5.166), we have 
E = f Wo 7/pr CL dW1 
Jw1 cVoo Cv W 
303 

===== PDF PAGE 317 =====
p A R T 2 * Airplane Performance 
Substituting Eq. 162) into 
E= 
or 
E= 
(5.167), we have 
,-s~-r dW I/pr I Poo LL '--' L · f - I --·--
c V 2W Co W 
Wo J~ "3/2 dW t/pr Pco;J •~ L f ·-- ------c 2 Cn W3/2 
By ma..ldng the assumptions of constant T/pr, c, p00 , and 
3/2 
E - I/pr ~scL fw-i/2 - w-l/2) - V L.PcoJ C I J O C D \ , 
The contingencies associated with the assumptions to 
Eq. becomes 
69] 
are the 
same as those discussed in Section 5.13.3 in regard to the range ~"um"'~'"· 
We note fromEq. (5.169) that maximum endurance for a propeiler-driven 
corresponds to the following conditions: 
L 
2. 
? /2 Fly at maximum C~ IC D. 
Have the highest possible propeller efficiency. 
3. Have the lowest possible specific fuel consumption. 
4. Have the highest possible difference between W0 and 
fuel). 
5. Fly at sea level, where Pco is the largest value. 
carry a lot of 
The flight conditions associated with ( cf12 /CD Jmax have been discussed in Section 
5.4. l. It follows that the theoretical maximum endurance for a propeller-driven air­
plane is obtained flying at the velocity where zero-lift drag equals one-third of the 
drag due to lift 
Cn,o = ! [5.36] 
This velocity is given by Eq, 
(
1 
2 fKw 
= Pco V 3CD,0 S 
1/2 
Note that this velocity is smaller than that for maximum as 
given in Eq. The value of (C~12 is by Eq. 
(ct\ = ! i __ 3_, 3/4 
\ CD j 4 (\KC}/J) , I max D,0 

===== PDF PAGE 318 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
5.14.2 Endurance for Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
Equation (5.167) is already expressed in terms of thrust specific fuel consumption, 
and it gives the endurance for a jet-propelled airplane directly. We repeat Eq. (5.167) 
for convenience: 
1 L Wo E=--ln-
c1D W1 
[5.167] 
Note from Eq. (5.167) that maximum endurance for a jet-propelled airplane corre­
sponds to the following conditions: 
1. FlyatmaximumL/D. 
2. Have the lowest possible thrust specific fuel consumption. 
3. Have the highest possible ratio of W0 to W1 (i.e., carry a lot of fuel). 
The flight conditions associated with maximum L / D have already been discussed 
at length in Section 5.4.1, and repeated in Section 5.13.1. Hence, they will not be 
repeated below. 
Estimate the maximum endurance for the Gulfstream IV, using the pertinent data from previous 
examples. 
Solution 
From the data given in Example 5.19, the fuel weight is 29,500 lb and the specific fuel con­
sumption is 0.69 lb of fuel consumed per hour per pound of thrust, which in consistent units 
gives c, = 1.917 x 10-4 s- 1• From Example 5.4, the maximum value of L/ Dis 14.43. From 
Eq. (5.167), 
1 L Wo 73,000 E = -- In - = 14.421n -- = 38,969 s c, D W1 1.917 X 10-4 43,500 
In units of hours, 
5.15 
E= 38,969 =~ 
3,600 ~ 
RANGE AND ENDURANCE: A SUMMARY AND SOME 
GENERAL THOUGHTS 
A rather detailed discussion of range and endurance has been given in Sections 5.13 
and 5.14, respectively. It will be helpful to now step back from these details for a 
moment and to look at the more general picture. This is the purpose of this section. 
305 
Example 5.20 

===== PDF PAGE 319 =====
306 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
5.15.1 More on Endurance 
The simplest way to think about endurance is in terms of pounds of fuel consumed 
per hour. The smaller the number of pounds of fuel consumed per hour, the longer 
the airplane will be able to stay in the air, that is, the longer the endurance. Let us 
examine what dictates this parameter, first for a propeller-driven airplane and then for 
a jet airplane. 
Propeller-Driven Airplane The specific fuel consumption for a propeller-driven air­
plane is based on power. The conventional expression for specific fuel consumption 
(SFC) is given in terms of the inconsistent units of horsepower and hours. 
lb of fuel consumed 
SFC=------
(shaft bhp) (h) 
[5.170] 
where the shaft brake horsepower is provided by the engine directly to the shaft. In 
tum, the horsepower available for the airplane is given by 
HPA = 7/pr (shaft bhp) 
In steady, level flight, recall that power available equals power required: HP A = HPR. 
Hence, from Eq. (5.170), we can write the relation 
lb of fuel consumed ( ) ------ ex: (SFCJ HPR 
hour 
[5.171] 
Therefore, minimum pounds of fuel consumed per hour are obtained with minimum 
HPR. This minimum point on the power required curve is labeled point 1 in Fig. 5 .4 7. 
This point defines the conditions for maximum endurance for a propeller-driven air­
plane. Moreover, from Section 5.6.2, this point also corresponds to the aerodynamic 
condition of flying at (Cf12 / C v)rrnlX.. The velocity at which this occurs is the flight 
velocity for best endurance for a propeller-driven airplane. All this information is 
labeled in association with point 1 in Fig. 5.47. 
Jet-Propelled Airplane The specific fu_el consumption for a jet-propelled airplane is 
based on thrust. The c,:onventional expression for thrust specific fuel consumption 
(TSFC) is given in terms of the inconsistent unit of hours. 
lb of fuel connsumed 
TSFC = ------
(thrust) (h) 
[5.172] 
Hence, from Eq. (5.172), and noting that in steady, level flight TA = TR, we can write 
lb of fuel consumed 
------ = TR (TSFC) 
h 
[5.173] 
Therefore, minimum pounds of fuel consumed per hour are obtained with minimum 
TR. This minimum point on the thrust required curve is labeled point 2 in Fig. 5.47. 
This point,delmes the conditions for maximum endurance for a jet-propelled air­
plane. Moreover, from Section 5.3.2, this point also corresponds to the aerodynamic 

===== PDF PAGE 320 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
~ [ 
8 .... 
J .£ .., 
~ 0 
' ~ st 
d,_li<. ] .., 
(a) v~ 
I ----11------
I ---- I -1-- I 
------ I I ---
Figure 5.47 
~~) v~, 
V~ best endurance V~ best range for prop V~ best range for jet 
for prop V~ best endurance for jet "Carson's speed" for prop 
Graphical surrmary of conditions for maximum range and 
endurance. 
condition of flying at (L / D)max· The velocity at which this occurs is the flight veloc­
ity for best endurance for a jet-propelled airplane. All this infonnation is labeled in 
association with point 2 in Fig. 5 .4 7. 
307 

===== PDF PAGE 321 =====
308 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
5.15.2 More on Range 
The simplest way to think about range is in terms of pounds of fuel consumed per 
mile. The smaller the number of pounds of fuel consumed per mile, the larger the 
distance the airplane can fly, that is, the larger the range. Let us examine what dictates 
this parameter, first for a propeller-driven airplane and then for a jet airplane. 
Propeller-Driven Airplane The pounds of fuel consumed per mile for a propeller­
driven airplane are given by 
lb of fuel consumed (SFC)HPR [5.174] = mi T/pr Voo 
where V00 is in miles per hour. Clearly, from Eq. (5.174) the minimum pounds of 
fuel consumed per mile are obtained with minimum HPR/ V00 • Return to Fig. 5.47a. 
-Imagine a straight line drawn from the origin to any arbitrary point on the power 
required curve (and consider the units of power to be horsepower). The slope of such 
a line is HPR / V 00 • The minimum value of this slope occurs when the straight line 
is tangent to the HPR curve; this tangent point is denoted by point 3 in Fig. 5.47a. 
Therefore, point 3 corresponds to the conditions for maximum range for a propeller­
driven airplane. Since PR = TR V00 , then 
and therefore minimum HPR/ V00 corresponds to minimum TR. From Section 5.3.2, 
this corresponds to flight at maximum L / D. This is also the flight condition for 
point 2 in Fig. 5.47b. Therefore, point 3 in Fig. 5.47a corresponds to the same flight 
velocity as point 2 in Fig. 5.47b. As itemized on Fig. 5.47, the flight conditions for 
maximum range for a propeller-driven airplane are the same as those for maximum 
endurance for a jet-propelled airplane. 
Jet-Propelled Airplane The pounds of fuel consumed per mile for a jet airplane are 
given by 
lb of fuel consumed (TSFC)TR [5.175] 
where V00 is in miles per hour. From Eq. (5.175), the minimum pounds of fuel 
consumed per mile are obtained with minimum TR/ V 00 • Return to Fig. 5.47b. Imagine 
a straight line drawn from the origin to any arbitrary point on the 
thrust required 
curve. The slope of such a line is TR/ V00 • The minimum value of this slope occurs 
when the straight line is tangent to TR; this tangent point is denoted by point 4 in 
Fig. 5.47b. Therefore, point 4 corresponds to the conditions for maximum range for a 
jet-propelled airplane. Furthemi.ore, the aerodynamic condition that holds at point 4 

===== PDF PAGE 322 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
is found as follows. 
TR 1 1 f2W (PooWS) 112 Cv Voo = 2p00 VooSCv = 2Pooy-;;;;sc;,SCv = --2- ct [5.176] 
From Eq. (5.176), TR/V00 is a minimum when Cv/CJ! 2 is a minimum, or when 
cl12 /Cv is a maximum. Thus, at point 4, the flight conditions correspond to flight 
at (Ci12 /Cv)max· 
In addition, recall from Section 5.13.3 that Carson's speed for a propeller-driven 
airplane is given as the flight velocity that corresponds to a minimum value of T / V 00 • 
Hence, point 4 in Fig. 5.47b also corresponds to Carson's speed. 
5.15.3 Graphical Summary 
Study Fig. 5.47 carefully. It is an all-inclusive graphical construction that illustrates 
the various conditions for maximum range and endurance for propeller-driven and 
jet-propelled aircraft. In particular, note the flight velocities for these conditions, 
that is, the three velocities corresponding to points 1, 2 and 3, and 4. Maximum 
endurance for a propeller-driven airplane occurs at the lowest of these velocities 
(point 1). The velocity for maximum range for a propeller-driven airplane, and for 
maximum endurance for a jet airplane, is higher (points 2 and 3). The velocity for 
maximum range for a jet airplane (point 4) is the highest of the three. Denoting 
the three velocities by Vi, V2, and V3, the results of Section 5.4.1 show that, from 
Eq. (5.42) 
V1 = 0.76V2 = 0.76YJ 
and from Eq. (5.46) 
Also, note that the construction of a line through the origin tangent to either the 
PR curve or the TR curve yields useful information. This construction allows a simple 
method for dealing with the effect of wind, as discussed below. 
5. 15.4 The Effect of Wind 
Most preliminary performance analyses assume that the airplane is flying through a 
stationary atmosphere, that is, there are no prevailing winds in the atmosphere. This 
has been the assumption underlying all our performance analyses in this chapter. 
Although not important for such a preliminary analysis, it is worthwhile to at least 
ask the question: How is endurance affected by a headwind or a tailwind? Similarly, 
how is range affected? Let us examine the answers to these questions. 
First, we emphasize that the aerodynamic properties of the airplane depend on 
the velocity of the air relative to the airplane V00 • The aerodynamics does not "care" 
309 

===== PDF PAGE 323 =====
310 
Figure 5.48 
P t,, R T 2 ® Airplane Performance 
whether there is a headwind or a tailwind. For example, in all our previous discussions, 
V 00 is the velocity of the free stream relative to the airplane. It is the true airspeed 
of the airplane. In a stationary atmosphere, V 00 is also the velocity of the airplane 
relative to the ground. However, when there is a headwind or tailwind, the velocity 
of the airplane relative to the air is different from that of the airplane relative to the 
ground. We denote the velocity of the airplane relative to the ground as simply the 
ground speed Vg. When there is a headwind or a tailwind, Vg is different from V00 • 
Again, keep in mind that the aerodynamics of the airplane depends on V 00 , not V8 . 
The relationship between V 00 and V8 is illustrated in Fig. 5.48. In Fig. 5.48a, the 
airplane is flying into a headwind of velocity V HW. The airplane's relative velocity 
through the air is V00 , and its ground velocity is Vg = V00 - VHw, as shown in 
Fig. 5.48a. Simiarly, in Fig. 5.48b the airplane is flying with a tailwind of velocity 
Vrw- Here, the airplane's ground speed is V8 = V00 + Vrw, as shown in Fig. 5.48b. 
To return to the two questions asked at the beginning of this subsection, endurance 
is not influenced by the wind. The airplane's relative velocity V 00 is simply that for 
maximum endurance, as explained in previous sections. The distance covered over 
the ground is irrelevant to the consideration of endurance. 
The same cannot be said about range. Range is directly affected by wind. An 
extreme example occurs when the relative velocity of an airplane through the air is 
l 00 mi/h, and there is a headwind of 100 mi/h. The ground speed is zero-the airplane 
just hovers over the same location, and the range is zero. Clearly, range depends on 
the wind. 
Indeed, range is a function of ground speed V8 ; the ground speed is what enters 
into the consideration of distance covered over the ground. For example, letting s 
denote the horizontal distance covered over the gound, we have 
ds Vg= -dt 
or 
ds = V8 dt [5.177] 
CompareEqs. (5.177) and (5.146). They are the same relationship, becauseEq. (5.146) 
(a) {b) 
Relationship between Righi velodiy V 00 and speed V 8 for headwind ond !lb) tailwind. 

===== PDF PAGE 324 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
assumes a stationary atmosphere, that is, no wind. Hence, in Eq. (5.146), V00 rep­
resents the ground speed as well as the airspeed. However, with a wind, we have to 
remember that the fundamental relationship is Eq. ( 5 .177), not Eq. ( 5 .146). Following 
a derivation analogous to that for Eq. (5.152), Eq. (5.177) leads to the expression for 
range for a jet-propelled airplane 
R = Vg ~ ln Wo [5.178] 
Cr D W1 
The power available for the airplane is, as before, the product of the thrust and the 
true airspeed of the airplane TV00 , no matter what the wind velocity may be. Hence, 
Eq. (3.43) still holds, namely, cr = c V 00 /T/pr· In turn, Eq. (5.178) can be written as 
R = T/pr Vg L In Wo 
C Vex:, D W1 [5.179] 
which is in a form convenient for calculating the range for a propeller-driven airplane. 
The values of V 00 that correspond to maximum range for a jet airplane and a 
propeller-driven airplane including the effect of wind can be found by differentiating 
Eqs. (5.178) and (5.179), respectively, with respect to V00 and setting the derivatives 
equal to zero. The details can be found in Refs. 41 and 49. Because of the appearance 
of Vg in Eqs. (5.178) and (5.179), the values of V00 that result in maximum range 
with wind effects are different from those we obtained earlier for the case of no wind. 
Indeed for both the jet airplane and the propeller-driven airplane, the best-range value 
of V00 with a headwind is higher than that for no wind, and the best-range value of 
V 00 with a tailwind is lower than that for no wind. See Refs. 41 and 49 for analytical 
expressions for these best-range airspeeds with wind. · 
A graphical approach provides a more direct way of obtaining the best-range 
airspeeds with wind. First, consider a propeller-driven airplane. Range is determined 
by the pounds of fuel consumed per mile covered over the ground. Hence, analogous 
to Eq. (5.174), we write 
lb of fuel consumed (SFC)HPR [5.180] 
mi T/pr Vg 
Clearly, from Eq. (5.180) minimum number of pounds of fuel consumed per mile, 
which corresponds to maximum range, is obtained with minimum HPR / Vg. Consider 
the power required curve sketched in Fig. 5.49. This is a plot of HPR versus airspeed 
V 00 ; it is our familiar power required curve as discussed throughout this chapter. 
It depends on the aerodynamics of the airplane, which depends on V 00 • Also, as 
discussed in Section 5.15.2, a line drawn from the origin tangent to the HPR curve 
at point 1 defines the airspeed for maximum range without wind. This is shown by 
point 1 in Fig. 5.49. Now assume that a headwind with velocity V HW exists. Hence, 
Vg = V 00 - V HW. If we want to use Vg as the abscissa rather than V 00 in Fig. 5.49, 
we have to shift the origin to the right, to the tick mark labeled VHw, and place the 
origin of the new abscissa at that point, as indicated by the new abscissa labeled Vg 
in Fig. 5.49. The power required curve stays where it is-it does not move because 
it depends on the airspeed V 00 • However, the condition for best range with wind is 
311 

===== PDF PAGE 325 =====
312 P A R T 2 11 Airplane Performance 
figure 5.49 
2
11 
------;,;;- 'f H~q 
'------v---' 
I V I g 
0 
Effect of headwind on best-range airspeed for a 
propeller-driven airplane. 
given by Eq. (5.180), and the minimum HPR/V 8 corresponds to the solid straight 
line through the point labeled VHw tangent to the power required curve. The tangent 
point is point 2 as sketched in Fig. 5.49. The slope of this line is HPR / Vg, as shown 
in Fig. 5.49, and it is the minimum value of the slope because it is tangent to the 
HPR curve. Hence, from Eq. (5.18'0), point 2 corresponds to the flight conditions for 
maximum range with a headwind of strength VHw· Point 2 identifies the value of 
the airspeed V 00 for best range with a headwind. Note that this value is larger than 
that for best range with no wind, confirming our previous statement in the analytical 
discussion. The case for a tailwind is treated in a similar fashion, except the point for 
Vrw on the original abscissa is to the left of the origin, as shown in Fig. 5.50. Point 
3 in Fig. 5.50 is the tangent point on the HPR curve of a straight line drawn through 
the tick mark for Vrw. Point 3 identifies the value of the airspeed V 00 for best range 
with a tailwind. Note that this value is smaller than that for best 
range with no wind, 
consistent with our earlier discussion. 
Consider a jet-propelled airplane. Range is again determined by the pounds of 
fuel consumed per mile covered over the ground. Hence, analogous to Eq. (5.175), 
we write 
ib of fuel consumed 
mi 
[5.181] 
From Eq. ( 5.181 ), minimum number of pounds of fuel consumed per mile, which 
corresponds to maximum range, is obtained with minimum TR/Tg. Consider the 
thrust required curve sketched in Fig. 5 .51. This is a plot of TR versus V 00 ; it is the 
familiar thrust required curve discussed throughout this chapter. It depends on the 

===== PDF PAGE 326 =====
Figure 5.50 
Figure 5.51 
C H A P T E R 5 ® Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
0 
Effect of tailwind on best-range airspeed for o 
propeller-driven airplane. 
"Cl 
C: 
Ti 
"Cl 
"Cl "' 0., 
c:: "Cl ..c: ·; .s -s ] ii' ·; 
-s ::,.8 
·; 
::,.8 I 
0) I .,, I 
§ I 
.; I 
0) 
I i:x:i I 
31 
0 VHW 
I 
I 
v= 
Effect of tailwind and headwind on best-range 
airspeed for o iet. 
aerodynamics of the airplane, which depends on V00 • Note that the solid lines drawn 
tangent to the curve, one through the tick mark V8 w and the other through the tick 
mark VTw, identify the tangent points 2 and 3, respectively. Since the slopes of these 
lines are the minimum values of TR/ V8 , points 2 and 3 correspond to the values of 
V 00 for best range for a headwind and a tailwind, respectively. The interpretation 
of Fig. 5 .51 for the jet airplane is the same as that of Figs. 5 .49 and 5 .50 for the 
propeller-driven airplane. Hence, no further discussion is needed. 
313 

===== PDF PAGE 327 =====
314 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
5.16 SUMMARY 
By definition, the static performance analysis of an airplane assumes rectilinear mo­
tion with no acceleration. The material in this chapter provides the basis for a pre­
liminary static performance analysis. 
A few of the important aspects of this chapter are listed below. As you read 
through this list, if any items are unclear or uncertain to you, return to the pertinent 
section in the chapter and review the material until you are comfortable. 
1. For steady, level flight, the equations of motion are the simple equilibrium 
relations 
[5.3] 
L=W [5.4] 
2. The basic aerodynamics needed for a performance analysis is the drag polar. 
Cv = Cv,o + KCf [5.5] 
3. A thrust required curve is a plot of TR = D versus velocity for a given airplane 
at a given altitude. A thrust available curve is a plot of TA versus velocity for a 
given airplane at a given altitude. The high-speed intersection of the maximum 
thrust available and thrust required curves determines the maximum velocity of the 
airplane. Thrust required is inversely proportional to the lift-to-drag ratio 
w TR=--L/D 
[5.7] 
4. The design parameters TR/ W and W /Splay a strong role in airplane 
performance. An analytical expression for the resulting airplane velocity for a given 
TR/Wand W/S is 
.:.... [(Tg/W)(W/S) ± (W/S)J(TR/W) 2 - 4Cv,oKJ 112 
Voo - PooCD,O 
[5.18] 
5. A power required curve is a plot of PR versus velocity for a given airplane at a 
given altitude. A power available curve is a plot of PA versus velocity for a given 
airplane at a given altitude. The high-speed intersection of the maximum power 
available and the power required curves determines the maximum velocity of the 
airplane. The power required is inversely proportional to C£12 / C v 
2W3C2 1 __ D_CX---
poc,SCl cf12 /Cv 
[5.56] : 
6. The following aerodynamic relations are irripQrtant for a static performance 
analysis. 

===== PDF PAGE 328 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
a. Maximum LID occurs when tp.e zero-lift <µ:ag equa1.s the drag due to lift: 
Cv,o = KC£ [5.28] 
The value of (L/ D)max depends only on Cv,o and K. 
[5.30] 
The flight velocity at which (L/ D)max is achieved for a given airplane depends on 
the altitude and wing loading: 
1/2 
V(L/D)max = (2- W) Poo S 
[5.34] 
Minimum TR occurs when L/ Dis maximum. 
b. Maximum c;!2 / C v occurs when the zero-lift drag is one-third of the drag 
due to lift: 
Cv:o == !KC£ [5.36] 
The value of (C;! 2 /Cv)max depends only on Cv,o and K: 
. ·(c:!2) = ~ (-3 )3/4 
Cv 4 KCl/3 max D,O 
[5.38] 
The flight velocity at which (Cf12 /Cv)max is achieved for a given airplane depends 
on the altitude and wing loading: 
1/2 
· 2 W V J12 = .-. -(CL /Colmax ·· (Poo S) [5.41] 
Minimum PR occurs when cf12 / C v is maximum. 
c. Maximum cl12 /Cv occurs.when the zero-lift drag is 3 times the drag due to 
lift: 
Cv,o = 3KCi [5.43] 
The value of (Ct /Cv)max depends only on Cv,o and K: 
( c112) 3 ( 1 ) 114 
JD max= 4 3KCb,o 
[5.44] 
The flight velocity at which (Cl12 /Cv)max is achieved for a given airplane depends 
on the altitude and wing loading: 
1/2 
2 W V 112 - - -(CL /Colmax - (Poo S) [5.45] 
315 

===== PDF PAGE 329 =====
316 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
d. The flight velocities for maximum values of the above aerodynamic ratios 
are related in magnitude as follows: 
V(Ci12 /Cv)max : V(CL/Cv)max : V(CY2 /Cv)max = 0. 76 : 1 : 1.32 
7. The stall speed of a given airplane at a given altitude is dictated by (CL )max and 
the wing loading: 
Vstall = 
2 W 1 
Poo S (Cdmax 
(5.67] 
The values of ( C dmax can be increased by a variety of high-lift devices, such as 
trailing- and leading-edge flaps, slats, etc. 
8. Rate of climb is given by 
R/C = TV00 - DV00 = excess power 
w w (5.78] 
The various analytical expressions obtained for a rate of climb analysis show that 
R / C for a given airplane at a given altitude depends on wing loading and 
thrust-to-weight ratio. 
9. For unpowered gliding flight, the glide angle() is determined by 
1 Tan()= -­
L/D 
(5.125] 
10. Absolute ceiling is that altitude where (R/C)max = 0. Service ceiling is that 
altitude where (R/ C)max = 100 ft/min. 
11. The conditions for maximum range and maximum endurance are different. 
Moreover, they also depend on whether the airplane is propeller-driven or 
jet-propelled: 
propeller-driven 
R = ~ /2 clf2 (wJ12 - wi112) Cry ;::s CD 
c3;2 
E _ 7/pr ~S L (w-1/2 W-1/2) - -v-:.Poo"-c 1 - o 
C D 
E =_!__£In Wo 
c1 D Wi 
jet 
propeller-driven 
jet 
(5.153] 
(5.156] 
(5.169] 
(5.167] 
Note that maximum endurance for a propeller-driven airplane occurs when. the 
airplane is flying at (Ct /CD)max· Maximum range for a propeller-driven airplane 
and maximum endurance for a jet occur when the airplane is flying at (L/ D)max· 
Maximum range for a jet occurs when the airplane is flying at ( C lf2 /CD )max. 

===== PDF PAGE 330 =====
c H A P T E R 5 l\l Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
PROBLEMS 
The Bede BD-5J is a very small single-seat home-built jet airplane which became 5. 1 
available in the early 1970s. The data for the BD-5J are as follows: 
Wing span: 17 ft 
Wing planform area: 37.8 ft2 
Gross weight at ta.lceoff: 960 lb 
Fuel capacity: 55 gal 
Power plant one French-built Microturbo TRS 18 turbojet engine with maximum 
thrust at sea level of 202 lb and a specific fuel consumption of 1.3 lb/(lb·h) 
We will approximate the drag polar for this airplane by 
CD = 0.02 + 0.062C£ 
(a) Plot the thrust required and thrust available curves at sea level, and from these 
curves obtain the maximum velocity at sea level. 
(b) Plot the thrust required and thrust available curves at 10,000 ft, and from these 
curves obtain the maximum velocity at 10,000 ft. 
For the BD-5J (the airplane in Problem 5.1), calculate analytically (directly) (a) the 5.2 
maximum velocity at sea level and (b) the maximum velocity at 10,000 ft. Compare 
these results with those from Problem 5.1. 
Derive Eqs. (5.43), (5.44), and (5.45). 5.3 
Using the results of Section 5 .4.1, repeat the task in Problem 2.11: Find an expression 5.4 
for the maximum lift-to-drag ratio for a supersonic two-dimensional flat plate, and 
the angle of attack at which it occurs. Check your results with those from Problem 
2.11. They should be identical. 
For the BD-5J, calculate 5.5 
(a) The maximum value of CL/: CD 
(b) The maximum value of Ci 2 /CD 
(c) The velocities at which they occur at sea level 
The velocities at which they occur at 10,000 ft 
The BD-5J is equipped with plain flaps. The airfoil section at the wing root is an 5.6 
NACA 64-212, and interestingly enough, it has a thicker section at the tip, an NACA 
64-218 (Reference: Jane's All the World's Aircraft, 1975-76). Estimate the stalling 
speed of the BD-5J at sea level. 
For the BD-5J, plot the power required and power available curves at sea level. From 5.7 
these curves, estimate the maximum rate of climb at sea level. 
Derive Eq. (5.85) for the rate of climb as a function of velocity, th..rust-to-weight ratio, 5.8 
wing loading, and the drag 
317 

===== PDF PAGE 331 =====
P ~ R T 2 e, Airplane Performance 
5.9 For the BD-5J use the analytical results to calculate directly 
(a) Maximum rate of climb at sea level and the velocity at which it occurs. Compare 
with your graphical result from Problem 5.7. 
(b) Maximum climb angle at sea level and the velocity at which it occurs. 
5.10 For a turbojet-powered airplane with the altitude variation of thrust given by Eq. 
(3.19), show that as the altitude increases, the maximum velocity decreases. 
5.11 Consider the BD-5J flying at 10,000 ft. Assume a sudden and total loss of engine 
thrust. Calculate (a) the minimum glide path angle, the maximum range covered 
over the ground during the glide, and the corresponding equilibrium glide velocities 
at 10,000 ft and at sea level. 
5.1 :2 For the BD-5J, plot the maximum rate of climb versus altitude. From this graph, 
estimate the service ceiling. 
5.13 For the BD-5J, analytically calculate the service ceiling, and compare t.l,is result with 
the graphical solution obtained in Problem 5 .12. 
5.14 Using the analytical approach described in Section 5.12.2, calculate the minimum 
time to climb to 10,000 ft for the BD-5J. 
5.15 For the BD-5J, estimate the maximum range at an altitude of 10,000 ft. Also, calculate 
the flight velocity required to obtain this range. (Recall: All the pertinent airplane 
data, including the thrust specific 
fuel consumption, are given in Problem 5.1.) 
5.16 For the BD-5J, estimate the maximum endurance. 
5. 17 Calculate the maximum range at 10,000 ft for the BD-5J in a tailwind of 40 mi/h. 
5.18 In the worked examples in this chapter, the thrust available is assumed to be constant 
with velocity for the reasons explained at the end of Section 5 .1. However, in reality, 
the thrust from a typical turbofan engine decreases with an increase in velocity. The 
purpose of this and the following problems is to revisit some of the worked examples, 
this time including a velocity variation for the thrust available. In this fashion we will 
be able to examine the effect of such a velocity variation on the perfonnance of the 
airplane. The airplane is the same Gulfstream IV examined in the worked examples, 
with the same wing loading, drag polar, etc. However, now we consider the variation 
of thrust available given by 
At sea level: 
(1) 
At 30,000 ft: 
(2) 
Recall that (TA)V=O is the thrust at sea level at zero velocity. 
(a) At sea level, plot the thrust available curve using Eq. above, and the thrust 
required curve, both on the same graph. From this, obtain Vmax at sea level. 

===== PDF PAGE 332 =====
C H A P T E R 5 • Airplane Performance: Steady Flight 
(b) At an altitude of30,000 ft, plot the thrust available curve, using Eq. (2) above, and 
the thrust required curve, both on the same graph. From this obtain Vmax at 30,000 ft. 
(c) Compare the results obtained from (a) and (b) with the analytical results from 
Example 5.6. 
For the Gulfstream IV with the thrust available variations given by Eqs. (1) and (2) 5.19 
in Problem 5.18, analytically (directly) calculate Vmax at sea level and at 30,000 ft. 
Compare with the graphical results obtained in Problem 5.18. Comment on the 
increased level of difficulty of this calculation compared to that performed in Example 
5.6 where the thrust was assumed constant with velocity. 
For the Gulfstream IV with the thrust available variations given in Problem 5.18, do 5.20 
the following: 
(a) Plot the power available and power required curves at sea level. From this graphical 
construction, obtain the maximum rate of climb at sea level and the velocity at which 
it is obtained. Compare with the results obtained in Example 5.13. 
(b) Plot the power available and power required curves at 30,000 ft. From this graph­
ical construction, obtain the maximum rate of climb at 30,000 ft and the velocity at 
which it is obtained. 
When the thrust available variation is given by TA/(TA)V=O = AM~, develop an 5.21 
analytical solution for the calculation of maximum rate of climb. Compare this with 
the simpler analytical approach discussed in Section 5.10.2 for the case of constant 
thrust available. 
Use the development in Problem 5.21 to calculate analytically the maximum rate of 5.22 
climb at sea level and at 30,000 ft for the Gulfstream IV. Compare these analytical 
results with the graphical results from Problem 5.20. 
Use the two data points for maximum rate of climb obtained in Problem 5.20 ( or Prob- 5.23 
lem 5.22) to make an approximate estimate of the absolute ceiling for the Gulfstream 
IV. Compare this result with that obtained in Example 5.16. 
319 

===== PDF PAGE 333 =====


===== PDF PAGE 334 =====
Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
With its unique requirement for blending together such a wide range of the sciences, 
aviation has been one of the most stimulating, challenging, and prolific fields of 
technology in the history of mankind. 
Morgan M. (Mac) Blair 
Rockwell International, 1980 
The success or otherw~se of a design therefore depends to a large extent on the 
designer's knowledge of the physics of the flow, and no improvements in numerical 
and experimental design tools are ever likely to dispose of the need for physical 
insight. 
6. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Dietrich Kuchemann 
Royal Aircraft Establishment, 
England, 1978 
Our study of static performance (no acceleration) in Chapter 5 answered a number of 
questions about the capabilities of a given airplane-how fast it can fly, how far it can 
go, etc. However, there are more questions to be asked: How fast can it turn? How 
high can it "zoom"? What ground distances are covered during takeoff and landing? 
The answers to these questions ,involve accelerated flight, the subject of this chapter. 
To this end, we return to the general equations of motion derived in Chapter 4, which 
you shou lrl review before going further. 
321 

===== PDF PAGE 335 =====
322 P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
6.2 LEVEL TURN 
The flight path and forces for an airplane in a level turn are sketched in Fig. 6.1. Here, 
the flight path is curved, in contrast to the rectilinear motion studied in Chapter 5. 
By definition, a level turn is one in which the curved flight path is in a horizontal 
plane parallel to the plane of the ground; that is, in a level tum the altitude remains 
constant. The relationship between forces required for a level turn is illustrated in 
Horizontal plane 
Top view of 
horizontal plane 
I Top view I 
L 
\ 
~--R-'~ 
I '\ w 
[ Front vievJ 
Figure 6.1 An airplane in a level ium. 

===== PDF PAGE 336 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
Fig. 6.1. Here, the airplane is banked through the roll angle</>. The magnitude of the 
lift L and the value of</> are adjusted such that the vertical component of lift, denoted 
by L cos¢, exactly equals the weight, or 
/ Leos</>= W I [6.1) 
Under this condition, the altitude of the airplane will remain constant. Hence, Eq. 
(6.1) applies only to the case of a level tum; indeed, it is the necessary condition for 
a level tum. 
Another way of stating this necessary condition is to consider the resultant force 
Fr, which is the vector sum of vectors Land W. As shown in Fig. 6.1, for the case 
of the level tum, the magnitude and direction of L are adjusted to be just right so that 
the vector sum of L and W results in Fr always being in the horizontal plane. In this 
fashion the altitude remains constant. 
The generalized force diagram for an airplane in climbing and banking flight is 
given in Fig. 4.3. When this figure is specialized for level flight, that is, () = 0, and 
assuming the thrust vector is parallel to the free-stream direction, that is, E = 0, then 
the force diagram for a level tum is obtained as sketched in Fig. 6.1. The governing 
equation of motion is given by Eq. ( 4. 7), specialized for the cas~ of() = 0 and E = 0, 
namely, 
y2 
m:....!E.. = Lsinq, [6.2) 
r2 
Recalling Fig. 4.5, we see that r2 is the local radius of curvature of the flight path in 
the horizontal plane. This is the same as the radius R shown in Fig. 6.1. Hence, for 
a level tum, the governing equation of motion is, from Eq. (6.2), 
vz . 
m:....!E.. = Lsin</> R [6.3) 
Equation (6.3) is simply a physical statement that the centrifugal force m V!/ R is 
balanced by the radial force L sin</>. 
The two performance characteristics of greatest importance in turning flight are 
1. The tum radius R. 
2. The tum rate w = di/r/dt, where 1/r is defined in Fig. 6.1. The tum rate is 
simply the local angular velocity of the airplane along the curved flight path. 
These characteristics are particularly germane to combat aircraft. For superior dog­
fighting capability, the airplane should have the smallest possible tum radius R and 
the fastest possible tum rate w. What aspects of the airplane determine R and w? Let 
us examine this question. 
First, take another look at Fig. 6.1. The airplane is turning due to the radial force 
Fr· The larger the magnitude of this force F,, the tighter and faster will be the tum. 
The magnitude F, is the horizontal component of the lift L sin </>. As L increases, 
F, increases for two reasons: (1) The length of the lift vector increases, and (2) </> 
323 

===== PDF PAGE 337 =====
324 P A R T 2 • Airplane.Performance 
increases becau.se for a level tum, L cos¢ must remain constant, namely, equal to W, 
as seen fromEq. (6.1). Hence, the lift vector L controls the tum; when a pilot goes 
to tum the airplane, she or he rolls the airplane in order to point the lift vector in the 
general direction of the tum. Keep in mind that L and ¢ are not independent; they 
are related by the condition 
for a level tum given by Eq. (6.1), which can be written 
as 
W 1 cos¢=-=--L L/W 
[6.4] 
In Eq. (6.4), the ratio L/ Wis an important parameter in turning performance; it is 
defined as the load factor n, where 
[6.5] 
Hence, Eq. (6.4) can be written as 
I ¢=Am~ [6.6] 
The roll angle ¢ depends only on the load factor; if you know the load factor, then 
you know¢, and vice versa. The tum performance of an airplane strongly depends 
on the load factor, as we will next demonstrate. 
To obtain an expression for the tum radius, insert m = W jg in Eq. (6.3) and 
solve for R. 
From Eq. (6.4), 
mV2 W V2 V2 
R= __ oo_ = -~ = oo 
L sin¢ L g sin¢ gn sin¢ 
1 cos¢= -n 
and from the trigonometric identity 
cos2 efJ + sin2 efJ = 1 
we have 
(1)2 · ;:; + sin2 ¢ = 1 
or 
[6.7] 
[6.8] 

===== PDF PAGE 338 =====
C H A P T E R 6 ® Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
By substituting Eq. (6.8) into Eq. (6.7), the turn radius is expressed as 
R - oo I V' I - g./n2=1 I 
[6.9] 
From Eq. (6.9), the turn radius depends only on V00 and n. To obtain the smallest 
possible R, we want 
1. The highest possible load factor (i.e., the highest possible L / W). 
2. The lowest possible velocity. 
To obtain an expression for the turn rate w, return to Fig. 6.1 and recall from 
physics that angular velocity is related to R and V 00 as 
dijr Voo 
w=-=-dt R 
Replacing R in Eq. (6.10) with Eq. (6.9), we have 
From Eq. (6.11), to obtain the largest possible tum rate, we want 
L The 
highest possible load factor. 
2. The lowest possible velocity. 
These are exactly the same criteria for the smallest possible R. 
[6, 10] 
[6.11] 
This leads to the following questions. For a given airplane in a level turn, what is 
the highest possible load factor? Equations ( 6. 9) and ( 6.11) show that R and w depend 
only on V 00 and n-design characteristics such as W / S, T / W, and the drag polar, as 
well as altitude, do not appear explicitly. The fact is that even though the expression 
for Rand win general contains only Y00 and n, there are specific constraints on the 
values of Y 00 and n for a given airplane, and these constants do depend on the design 
characteristics and altitude. Let us examine these constraints. 
Ccmsh'ainl's on Lood fador Return to Fig. 6.1, and note that as the airplane's bank 
angle ¢ is increased, the magnitude of the lift must increase. As L increases, the drag 
due to lift increases. Hence, to maintain a sustained level turn at a given velocity and 
a given bank angle ¢, the thrust must be increased from its straight and level flight 
value to compensate for the increase in drag. If this increase in thrust pushes the 
required thrust beyond the maximum thrust available from the power plant, then the 
level tum cannot be sustained at the given velocity and bank angle. In this case, to 
maintain a tum at the given Y00 , ¢ will have to be decreased in order to decrease the 
drag sufficiently that the thrust required does 
not exceed the thrust available. Since 
3:25 

===== PDF PAGE 339 =====
326 P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
the load factor is a function of <jJ via Eq. (6.6), written as 
[6.12] n=--
cos<jJ 
at any given velocity, the maximum possible load factor for a sustained level tum is 
constrained by the maximum thrust available. 
This maximum possible load factor nmax can be calculated as follows. From the 
drag polar, the drag is 
D = 1Poo V;,S (Cv.o + KCl) 
For a level turn, the thrust equals the drag. 
Also, 
or 
T=D 
2nW CL=--­
Poo V~S 
Substituting Eqs. (6.14) and (6.15) into Eq. (6.13), we have 
T = ~Poo V!S [cv.o + K ( 2n~ )
2
] 
2 \ Pc,:,V 00 S 
[6. '13] 
[6.14] 
[6.1 SJ 
[6.16] 
Solving Eq. (6.16) for n (the details are left for a homework problem), we have 
[6.17] 
Equation (6.17) gives the load factor .(hence <jJ) for a given velocity and thrust-to­
weight ratio. The maximum value of n is obtained by inserting T = Tmax, or 
(T / W)max, into Eq. (6.17). 
[6.18] 
Hence, although Eqs. (6.9) and (6.11) show that Rand w depend only on V00 and 
n, the load factor cannot be any arbitrary value. Rather, for a given V00 , n can only 
range between 
where nmax is given by Eq. (6.18). Hence, there is a constraint on n imposed by the 
maximum available thrust. Moreover, from Eq. (6.18), nmax is dictated by the design 
parameters W /S, T /W, Cv.o, and K as well as the altitude (via p00 ). 

===== PDF PAGE 340 =====
C H A P T E R 6 ~ Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
The variation of nmax versus velocity for a given airplane, as calculated from 
Eq. (6.18), is shown in Fig. 6.2. The airplane considered here is the Gulfstream-like 
airplane treated in the examples in Chapter 5. The altitude is sea level; the results 
will be difficult for different altitudes. At the maximum velocity of the airplane, there 
is no excess power, hence no level tum is possible and n = 1. As V 00 decreases, 
nmax increases, reaches a local maximum value at point B, and then decreases. For 
velocities higher than that at point B, the zero-lift drag (which increases with V00 ) 
dominates; and for velocities lower than that at point B, the drag due to lift (which 
decreases with V 00 ) dominates. This is why the nmax curve first increases, then reaches 
a local maximum, and finally decreases with velocity. 
At point B in Fig. 6.2, the airplane is flying at its maximum L / D. This is easily 
seen from the relation (recalling that D = T) 
L LD LT n=-=--=--W DW DW 
When Tmax is inserted in Eq. (6.19), then n becomes nmax-the same quantity as 
calculated from Eq. (6.18): 
5 
~4 E t: .... 2 
3 [ 
(.) 
~ 
"O 
"' ..9 
8 
"' a ·;;: 
"' :.::E 2 
C/8 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
D,1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
nma,Eq. (6.23), stall limit 
B 
1 80 
<U 
"Si, 
40 § 
~ 
.0 
§ 
! 20] 
cl,ma>iSthe I ¢< Thrust is the constraint 
constraint I 
.__........,'---'-~--l....~~~~,-1 ~L..........l----L......~~~-~~~1-~0 
0 200 400 600 800 l ,000 1,200 
V00 • f!/s 
Figure 6.2 Thrusl and (Cdm""' conslrainll on maximum lood fuctor and maximum 
bank versus Righi T/W = 0.3795, = 76.84 
a~d K = and (Cdmax = 1.2. Ambienl conditions are 
327 

===== PDF PAGE 341 =====
328 PART 2 @ Performance 
For each point 
consistent with 
is the maximum 
the nmax curve in Fig. there is a different value of L/ D, 
When nmax reaches its local maximum at B-which 
value of in 
nM = 
max 
For the Gulfstream treated in ~.,~u,,~. 5, we found in 5.4 that 
14.43. Inserting this value 0.3795 into Eq. 
nM = 
in Fig. 6.2. 
There is another, different constraint on the load factor to do 
with the maximum lift coefficient In 
obtained from Eq. (6. there is a different value of 
It is easy to see 
the magnitude of L is maintained 
the of attack of the airplane. 
is limited by its maximum value at stall 
reached is denoted A in Fig. 6.2. At lower velocities, less than at point 
the maximum load factor is constrained by not by available thrust 
When nmax is constrained by (Cdmax, the value of nmax can be obtained as 
follows. 
In (6.22), when then n = nmax· 
The solid curve to the left of A in 6.2 is obtained from Eq. 
re1Jre:se,ms the value of nmax at low velocities where is the constraint In Fig. 
a value of = 1.2 is assumed. This is representative of a 
with moderate sweep and no devices 
Values of 
written as 
cos = 
rt max 
These values of 6.2 as a function of 
to note that the variation of 
we note that. the structural 
practical, mechanical constraint on the load factor. 
in Section 6.5. 
ofa a 
This constraint will be discussed 

===== PDF PAGE 342 =====
C H A P T E R 6 " Ai,plane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
Cons'«aints on V00 Returning to Eqs. (6.9) and (6.1 which show that R and w 
depend on V 00 and n, we have already stated that n cannot be any arbitrary 
value. Although for high performance these equations dictate that n should be as 
large as possible, there are definite limits on the value of n that are associated with 
the design aspects of the airplane. 
Equations (6.9) and (6.11) also show that for performance V 00 should be as 
small as possible. However, cannot be reduced indefinitely without encountering 
stall. Hence, the stall limit is a constraint on V 00 • Indeed, when the airplane is at a 
(/;, the stalling velocity is increased above that for straight and level flight. 
The stalling velocity is a function of the load factor. To show this, recall that 
Hence, 
When CL= 
' - W - 1 V 2 SC L - n - 2Poo 00 L 
I 2nW V: - / __ _ 
00 - y PooSCL 
is inserted into Eq. (6.24), then Voo = Vstall· 
/2 W n 
V,,a11 = !-----,. V Poo S (Cdmax 
[6.24] 
Equation (6.25) is a more general result for than that for straight and level flight 
given by 
Eq. (5.67). When n = l is inserted into Eq. .bq. is obtained. 
Hence, when the airplane is in a level tum with a load factor n > 1, the stalling 
velocity increases proportionally to n 112. This stalling velocity is a constraint on the 
minimum value of V00 that can be inserted in Eqs. (6.9) and 11) for Rand w. 
6.2. 1 Minimum Tum 
With all the above discussion on the level turn in mind, we now return to Eq. and 
ask: What is the smallest possible value of R for a given airplane? The minimum R 
does not necessa._riJy correspond to nmax = nM given point Bin Fig. 6.2, because 
R also depends on V 00 , and the minimum R may occur at a set of values Cnmax, V 00 ) 
different from those at B. Let us investigate this matter. 
The conditions for minimum R are found by setting d R / d V 00 = 0. The algebra 
wiH be simpler if we deal with dynamic pressure, q = !Poo rather than V00 • 
from Eq. (6.9), written in terms of q00 , 

===== PDF PAGE 343 =====
330 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
Differentiating Eq. (6.26) with respect to q00, remembering that n is a function of V00 
hence q00, and setting the derivative equal to zero, we have 
or 
or 
dR = 2gp00~ - 2gp00q00n(n 2 - 1)- 112 Jn/dq 00 = 0 
dq00 g2p~(n 2 - 1) 
2 dn , n - 1 - q00n - = 0 dqrx, [6.27] 
The load factor n as a function of q00 is given by Eq. (6.17), written in terms of q00. 
2 qoo ( T Cv.o) 
n = K(W/S) W -q00 W/S [6•28) 
I 
Differentiating Eq. (6.28) with respect to q00 gives 
dn T /W q00Cv,o n-=---
dq00 2K(W/S) K(W/S) 2 
. Substituting Eqs. (6.28) and (6.29) into Eq. (6.27), we have 
qoo T 
K(W/S) W 
q~CD,O -1- qrx,(T/W) + q~CD,O = O 
K(W/S)2 2K(W/S) K(W/S) 2 
Combining and cancelingterms, we get 
or 
q00(T /W) = l 
2K(W /S) 
2K(W/S) 
qoo = T/W 
Since q00 = !Poo V!, Eq. (6.30) becomes 
4K(W /S) 
Poo(T /W) 
[6.29] 
[6.30] 
[6.31] 
Equation (6.31) gives the value of V00 which corresponds to the minimum turning 
radius; this velocity is denoted by (V00 )Rmin in Eq. (6.31). In turn, the load factor 
corresponding to this velocity is foun,d by substituting Eq. (6.30) into Eq. (6.28) 
2 qrx,(T/W) q~CD,O 
n = K(W/S) - K(W/S) 2 
= 2K(W/S)(T/W) 4K2(W/S)2Cv,o = 2 _ 4KCD,o 
(T/W)K(W/S) (T/W)2K(W/S)2 (T/W)2 

===== PDF PAGE 344 =====
C H A P T E R 6 e Airplane Peiformance: Accelerated Flight 
or 
/ 4KCv,o II 
llRm;n = ,2 -(T / W)2 [6.32] 
Equation (6.32) gives the load factor corresponding to the minimum turning radius, 
denoted by n Rm;n. Finally, the expression for minimum turning radius is obtained by 
substituting Eqs. (6.31) and (6.32) into Eq. (6.9), written as 
(Vco)tn 4K(W/S) 
Rrmn = = ------;========== 
g/nt" - l Poo(T/W) g/2 -4KCD,o/(T/W) 2 - l 
4K(W/S) 
Rrrun = ------;========:::;: 
8Pco(T /W)jl - 4KCv,o/(T /W) 2 
[6.33] 
Calculate the minimum turning radius at sea level for the Gulfstream-like airplane treated in 
the orked examples in Chapter 5, and locate the corresponding conditions on Fig. 6.2. 
Selutic11 
From Eq. (6.33), 
R 4(0.08)(76.84) 
min= = 861 ft 
(32.2) (0.002377) (0.3795)../ 1 - 4(0.08) (0.015) / (0.3795) 2 
The corresponding load factor .and velocity are obtained from Eqs. (6.32) and (6.31), respec­
tively. 
nRmin = 
and 
2- 4KCD,O = 
(T/W) 2 
4K(W/S) 
Poo(T/W) 
4(0.08)(0.015) 2- = 1.4 (0.3795) 2 
4(0.08)(76.84) = 165 ft/s 
(0.002377)(0.3795) 
These values of n and V 00 locate point C on the nmax curve shown in Fig. 6.2. Right away, we 
see the value of Rmin = 861 ft is unobtainable; it corresponds to a velocity below the stalling 
velocity. Point C is beyond the (Cdmax constraint in Fig. 6.2. Indeed, the lift coefficient 
corresponding to point C is 
C = ~ W = 2(1.4)(76.84) = 3_32 
L p00 V;_, S (0.002377)(165) 2 
This value is well beyond the assumed value of (CL)max = 1.2 used in Eq. (6.23) for the 
generation of the ( C dmax constraint curve in Fig. 6.2. Therefore, for the airplane considered 
here, the minimum turning radius is constrained by stall, and it is not predicted by Eq. (6.33). 
Example 6.1 

===== PDF PAGE 345 =====
332 
Example 6.2 
P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
Rather, the smallest 
where, from the graph 
radius will actually be that corresponqing to point A in Fig. 6.2, 
VA= 445 ftJs 
Hence, 
v1 (445) 2 § Rmin = = = · 1,778 ft 
. gJn~ - 1 32.2j(3.6)2 - 1 I 
Note that the conditions for minimum turn radius are far different from those for the 
maximum value of nmax; C and A in Fig. 6.2 are far removed from point B. 
6.2.2 Maximum Tum Rate 
The thought process given for maximum tum rate parallels that given above for 
minimum tum radius--only the details are different. The conditions for maximum 
turn rate Wmax are obtained by differentiating Eq. 11) and setting the derivative 
equal to zero. The details are left for a homework problem. The results are 
V: _ .r 2(W/S)l1;2 (~ \ I/4 
( oo)wm~ - l I C /I Poo _ D,O 
[6.34] 
l/2 
[6.35] 
uJ _ Poo T/W _ Cv,o I [ ( )l/2] 
max - q ~ W /S 2K K [6.36] 
Calculate the maximum turning rate and the corresponding values of load factor and velocity 
for our Gulfstream-like airplane at sea level. 
Solution 
From Eq. (6.36), 
Wma· = 32.2 I 0.002377 r 0.3795 - { O.Dl5) l/2] = 0.25 rad/s 
- \j 76.84 L 2(0.08) \ 0.08 
Recalling that l rad= 57 .3°, we get 
Wmax = (0.25)(57.3) = 14.3 deg/s 
The corresponding value of n is obtained from Eq. (6.35). 
r o.3795 , 112 
n =l -1J =3.16 "'ma, ~(0.08)(0.015) 

===== PDF PAGE 346 =====
CHAPTER 6 @ Performance: Accelerated 333 
The corresponding value of V 00 is obtained from (634) 
These values of n and V 00 locate point D in Fig. 6.2. Once again, this is the stall 
limit, but slightly. The value of Wmax will be different from 14.27 deg/s calculated above, 
because Wmax is constrained by (Cdmax· Indeed, Wmax will correspond to A in Fig. 6.2, 
where VA = 445 ft/sand nA = 3.6. For this case, from Eq. (6.11) 
gJn~ _ l 32.2J(3.6) 2 _ i ~ I 
Wmax = = = 0.L5 rad/s = 14.3 deg/s 
. VA 445 ~----~ 
Note that, within roundoff error, this is the same value as calculated earlier from Eq. (6.36). 
This is because, for this case, points D and A in Fig. 6.2 are so close, and because w has a 
rather fl.at variation with V 00 in the vicinity of Wmax. 
DESIGN CAMEO 
Minimum turn radius and maximum rate are 
mr,n,t~,,t performance characteristics for a fighter air­
are much less so for a commercial transport 
bomber. For the design of a high-performance 
fighter, the results of this section reveal some of the de­
sign features desirabie for good turning 
performance. 
For example, an examination of Eqs. (6.33) and 
(6.36) shows that wing loading and thrust-to-weight 
ratio dominate the values of Rmin and Wmax· For 
good turn performance (low Rmin and high Wmax), 
should be low and T / W should be high. For 
the design of a modem high-performance fighter, 
T / W is usually dictated by other requirements than 
turn performance, such as the need to have a high 
supersonic maximum velocity, or a constraint on 
takeoff length. Wing loading is usually dictated by 
landing velocity (i.e., stall velocity) considerations. 
However, airplane design is always a compromise, 
and both T / W and W / S can be "adjusted" within 
some margins to enhance turning performance for a 
design where such performance is The 
designer can choose w make slightly smaller 
and T / W larger than would otherwise be 
the case, to give the new airplane "an edge" 
in performance over the competition. For 
example, there has been some discussion of designing 
a new wing for the F-15 supersonic fighter, a mainline 
aircraft for the U.S. Air Force since 1974. The new 
wing would be larger, hence reducing W / S, for the 
purpose of enhancing subsonic combat maneuverabil­
ity, at the cost of some decrease in maximum velocity. 
In regard to combat maneuverability the 
word is used to describe the overall concept of 
maneuverability), an examination of Eqs. (6.33) 
and (6.36) shows that minimum turn radius and maxi­
mum tum rate depend on p00 , that is, altitude. Turning 
performance increases with p00 • Hence, the best turn­
ing performance is achieved at sea level. Moreover, 
we have noted from Fig. 6.2 that Rmin and CVmax occur 
at relatively low velocities (e.g., denoted by points C 
and A, respectively, in Fig. 6.2). When modem fighters 
with supersonic capability engage in dogfights, their al­
titude generally decreases and the flight velocities are 
rapidly lowered, generally below Mach 1. Hence, the 
"combat arena," even for a Mach 3 airplane, is usually 
in the subsonic range. 
From Eqs. (6.33) and (6.36), good turning perfor­
mance is also enhanced by good aerodynamics, that is, 
low values of and K. In airplane design, good 
streamlining will result in lower Cv.o, with a 
weaker but still beneficial reduction in K. However, 
from the discussion surrounding Eq. (2.46), the drag­
due-to-!ift factor K is of the form 
(continued) 

===== PDF PAGE 347 =====
334 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
b K=a+­AR [6.37] 
Hence, for subsonic flight, the most direct way of re­
ducing K is to increase the aspect ratio AR. An air­
plane designed for good turn performance will benefit 
aerodynamically by having a high-aspect-ratio wing. 
Indeed, from Eq. (6.33) we see that Rmin varies slightly 
more strongly than [( to the first power (due to the 
added enhancement ef K in the denominator). 
However, structural design limitations place a ma­
jor constraint on the allowable design aspect ratio. This 
is particularzymie for airplanes designed for high turn­
ing performance; here the large load factors result in 
large pending moments at the wing root. The wingspan 
is rel)HY more germane than the aspect ratio in this con­
sideration. Airplanes with high maneuver performance 
sim:'ply do not have large wingspans, in order to keep 
the wing bending moments within reasonable design 
; limits. Some typical design features of subsonic high­
performance fighters are tabulated below. 
Aspect 
Wingspan (ft) Ratio 
North American P-51 
Mustang (World War II) 37 5.86 
Grumman F6F Hellcat 
(World War II) 42.8 5.34 
North American F-86 
Saberjet 37.1 4.78 
These airplanes are all monoplanes, that is, a single­
wing design. A way to have a short wingspan and 
a reasonably high aspect ratio at the same time is to 
go to a biplane configuration; here, the necessary 
lift is generated by two smaller wings rather than 
one larger wing. A perfect example is the famous 
aerobatic airplane, the Pitts Special, shown in Fig. 
6.3. For this airplane, the wingspan is only 20 ft, and 
yet the aspect ratio of each wing is (approximately) 
a respectable 6.4. The biplane configuration has 
good structural advantages, which is one reason 
why it is appealing for aerobatic airplanes which 
routinely are subjected to high stresses. Also, a shorter 
wingspan leads to a smaller rolling moment of inertia, 
and hence higher roll rates. These advantages were 
Figure 6.3 Pitts S-2A Special. Span of upper wing 
= 20 ft. Span of lower wing= 19 ft. Over­
all (total of both wings) planform wing area 
= 125 ft2. This yields an approximate 
aspect ratio of 6.4. 
among the reasons why the biplane configuration was 
favored during the early part of the twentieth century 
(see Section 1.2.2). However, the biplane configuration 
suffers from increased zero-lift drag due to the inter­
wing struts and bracing wires, and there is usually an 
unfavorable aerodynamic interaction between the two 
wings which.results in lower lift coefficients and higher 
induced drag coefficients. Hence biplanes are not usu­
ally efficient for high-speed flight. This, in concert 
with the development of the cantilevered, stressed-skin 
wing in the late 1920s, eventually led to the demise of 
the biplane (except for special applications) in favor of 
the monoplane. 
An important design feature which has a direct 
impact on turning performance is (Cdmax· We have 
(continued) 

===== PDF PAGE 348 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 335 
already discussed how (CL)max can constrain Rmin and 
Wmax· In Fig. 6.2, the curve at the left, generated from 
Eq. (6.23), reflects the constraint on turning perfor­
mance due to stall. This constraint dictates that Rrmn 
and Wmax correspond to point A rather than the more 
favorable thrust-limited values given by points C and 
D, respectively. However, the turning performance as­
sociated with points C and D could be achieved by 
shifting the stall limit curve sufficiently to the left. In 
tum, this can be achieved by a sufficient increase in 
(Cdmax• Hence, in the design of an airplane, turning 
performance can be enhanced by choosing a high-lift 
airfoil shape and/or incorporating high-lift devices that 
can be deployed during a tum. However, the primary 
factor in the design choice for (CL)max is usually the 
landing speed, not turning performance. Nevertheless, 
for those airplane designs where turning performance is 
particularly important, some extra emphasis on achiev­
ing a high ( C dmax is important and appropriate. 
Finally, in a similar vein, turning performance can 
be greatly enhanced by orienting the engine thrust vec-
Figure 6.4 The Lockheed-Martin F-22. 
tor in the direction of the tum. We have not considered 
this case in the present discussion. However, return 
to Fig .. 4.5, and note that in general the thrust has a 
component T sin E cos <I> in the direction of the tum. 
For a jet-powered airplane, by designing the engine 
nozzles to rotate relative to the axis of the rest of 
the engine, the value of E can be greatly increased, 
markedly increasing the magnitude of T sin E cos <I> in 
Fig. 4.5, and hence greatly increasing turning per­
formance. Such vectoring nozzles are used on some 
vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) airplanes for a 
different purpose, namely to provide a vertical thrust 
force; the Harrier fighter (Fig. 1.36) is an example. 
However, Harrier pilots in combat have used the vec­
tored thrust feature to also obtain enhanced tum per­
formance. The consideration of using vectored thrust 
to improve agility (which includes turning perform­
ance) is part of the new design philosophy for high­
performance jet fighters. The new Lockheed-Martin 
F-22 (Fig. 6.4) incorporates two-dimensional exhaust 
nozzles (convergent-divergent nozzles of rectangular 
(continued) 

===== PDF PAGE 349 =====
336 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
cross section, in contrast to the conventional axisym­
metric nozzle with a circular cross section) which can 
be rotated up or down for changing the direction of the 
thrust vector in the symmetry plane of the aircraft. An 
added advantage of two-dimensional exhaust nozzles 
is that they are easier to "hide" in the fuselage, reduc­
ing the radar cross section, hence improving the stealth 
characteristic of the airplane; 
We end this design cameo on the following note. 
To this author's knowledge, turning performance has 
never been the sole driver in the design of any airplane. 
Indeed, the 1903 Wright Flyer with its wing loading 
of 1.2 lb/ft2 can outturn and outmaneuver any mod­
ern high-performance fighter of today, such as the 
Lockheed-Martin F-16 with a wing loading of 7 4 lb/ft2 • 
However, the Wright Flyer cannot begin to carry out the 
supersonic, high-altitude missions for which the F-16 is 
primarily designed. So this is an "apples and oranges" 
comparison. On the other hand, a certain level of turn­
ing performance is frequently included in the specifi­
cations for a new fighter design, and the designer must 
be familiar with the design factors which Optimize turn 
performance in order to meet the specifications. Those 
factors have been highlighted in this design cameo. 
6.3 THE PULL-UP AND PULLDOWN MANEUVERS 
Consider an airplane initially in straight and level flight, where L = W. The pilot 
suddenly pitches the airplane to a higher angle of attack such that the lift suddenly 
increases. Because L > W, the airplane will arch upward, as sketched in Fig. 6.5. 
The flight path becomes curved in the vertical plane, with a tum radius R and tum 
rate d(J / dt. This is called the pull-up maneuver. 
The general picture of the flight path in the vertical plane and the components 
of force which act in the vertical. plane, are sketched in Fig. 4.4. For the pull-up 
maneuver, the roll angle is zero, that is, ¢ = 0. The picture shown in Fig. 6.5 is a 
Figure 6.5 
R 
w 
I I 
I I 
I I 
/~ 
I u I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
L 
D 
The pull-up maneuver. 

===== PDF PAGE 350 =====
C H A P T E R 6 @ Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
specialized case of that shown in Fig. 4A, where ¢ = 0 and E = 0. The appropriate 
eq1l!at1or1s of motion associated with the flight in Fig. 4.4 are Eqs. ( 4.5) and 
In particular, for ¢ = 0 and E = 0 becomes 
I m -'E = L - w cos e I , R 
[_~~~~~~~~~ 
[6.38] 
is as shown in Fig. 6.5. is a 
governing of motion for the path shown in Fig. 6.5. 
Unlike the level turn discussed in Section 6.2, where we considered a sustained 
tum (constant properties the level turn), in the pull-up maneuver we 
will focus on an instantaneous tum, where we are interested in the turn radius and 
tum rate at the instant that the maneuver is initiated. Airplanes frequently execute 
sustained level turns, but rarely a sustained pull-up maneuver with constant flight 
properties. The instantaneous pull-up is of much greater interest, and we will focus 
on it. Moreover, we assume the instantaneous pull-up is initiated from straight and 
level horizontal flight; this corresponds to 8 = 0 in Fig. 6.5. For this case, Eq. (6.38) 
becomes 
v2 
m-'E = L - W 
R 
[6.39] 
As in the case of the level turn, the pull-up performance characteristics of greatest 
interest are the turn radius Rand tum rate cv = d(} / dt. The instantaneous tum radius 
is obtained from Eq. as follows. 
mV 2 W V 2 R = __ oo_ = ___ oo_ = ____ _ 
L - W g L - W g (L/ W - l) 
[6.40] 
Noting that L/W is the load factor n, we see that Eq. (6AO) can be written as 
y2 
R = oo 
g(n - 1) 
[6.41] 
The instantaneous turn rate (angular velocity) is given by cv = V00 / R. Hence, from 
Eq. (6.41) we have 
[6.42] 
A related case is the pulldown maneuver, sketched in Fig. 6.6. Here, an airplane 
initially in and level is suddenly rolled to an inverted position, such that 
both L and W are pointing downward. The airplane will begin to turn downward in 
a flight with instantaneous tum radius R and tum rate w = d 8 / d t. For this case, 
the equation of motion is still Eq. (6.38) with 8 taken as 180° (see Fig. 6.6). For this 
337 

===== PDF PAGE 351 =====
338 P A R i 2 4P Airplane Performance 
w 
L 
I 
I/ r1 
u + 
\ I 
~l 
I 
I 
Figure 6.6 The pulldown maneuver. 
case, Eq. (6.38) is written as 
Hence, 
v2 
m_S:£ =L+W R 
mV2 W V2 V2 R = __ oo_ = __ oo_ = oo 
L+W g L+W g(L/W+l) 
Since n = L/W, Eq. (6.44) becomes 
vz 
R = oo 
g(n + 1) 
and w = V 00 / R becomes 
g(n + 1) 
w= ---Voo 
[6.43] 
[6.44] 
[6.45] 

===== PDF PAGE 352 =====
c H A P T E R 6 ~ Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
Note the similarity between Eqs. (6.41) and (6.42) for pull-up and between Eqs. 
(6.45) and (6.46) for pulldown; the difference is only a minus and plus sign in the 
parentheses. Also note that, as in the case for the level turn, for the pull-up and 
pulldown, Rand w depend only on the flight characteristics V00 and n. 
DESIGN CAMEO 
The airplane design features for good pull-up and pull­
down performance are the same as those for good turn­
ing performance, as discussed at the end of Section 6.2. 
This is because the roles of V00 and n in Eqs. (6.41), 
(6.42), (6.45), and (6.46) are qualitatively the same as 
those in Eqs. (6.9) and (6.11) for the level tum. 
6.4 LIMITING CASE FOR LARGE LOAD FACTOR 
Consider the tum radius equations for the level tum, puU-up, and pull down maneuvers, 
as repeated here: 
Level turn 
v2 
R = oo 
gR--:::-f [6.9] 
Pull-up 
v2 
R = oo 
g(n - 1) 
[6.41] 
Pull down 
vz 
R = oo 
g(n + l) 
[6.45] 
In the limit of large load factor n » 1, these three equations reduce to the same form, 
namely, 
[6.47] 
Similarly, consider the expressions for turn rate for the level. turn, pull-up, and 
down maneuvers, as repeated here: 
Level tum 
Pull-up 
gR--:::-f 
w= -----Voo 
g(n - 1) w=--­Voo 

===== PDF PAGE 353 =====
340 PART 2 @ Performa.1ce 
Pull down + 1) w= ----
In u'1e limit of large load factor, these equations reduce to the same 
1 gn I 
f w=-, 
·---·--" 
The physical reason why the same form for R is obtained in the limiting case of large 
n for all three maneuvers is that the magnitude of the lift is so large that the weight is 
unimportant by comparison. In all three cases, the lift vector dominates the dynamics. 
The same is true for w. 
The pull-up and pulldown maneuvers considered in Section 6.3 are treated as 
instantaneous, in contrast to the sustained maneuver discussed in 
Section 6.2. For instantaneous maneuvers, the thrnst limitations discussed in Section 
6.2 are not relevant. Why? An instantaneous maneuver is initiated by a sudden 
change in lift, achieved by a sudden increase in angle of attack. The is suddenly 
increased as well, causing the to a deceleration. However, at the 
instant the maneuveiis initiated, the instantaneous velocity is 
(6.41), (6.42), (6.45), and and as it appears in the limit given 
Eqs. (6.47) and (6.48). So even though the airplane will feel a sudden increase in drag 
and therefore a sudden deceleration, the velocity decreases after the instant of 
initiation of the maneuver. increase in thrust to counteract the increase in drag 
comes "after the fact." So, by definition of an instantaneous maneuver, the of 
thrust limitation discussed in regard to the sustained tum in Section 6.2 is not relevant 
to the instantaneous maneuver. 
Let us use the limiting equations, Eqs. (6.47) and to examine those char-
acteristics of the airplane which are important to an instantaneous maneuver. In this 
category we will include the instantaneous tum as well as the or uu"~"" 
Eqs. (6.47) and (6.48) govern all three of instantaneous maneuvers in the limit 
of large n. In these equations, can be replaced as follows. 
Since 
then 
and 
w= 
(6.49) into 
L = !Poo 
y2 -
00 -
2L 
we have 
R = y:c == . 2L ___ ·_ ·---- 2£ ____ = ---·~--·· W 
gn S 

===== PDF PAGE 354 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 341 
Examining Eqs; (6.50) and (6.51), we see clearly R will be a minimum and w will be 
a maximum when both CL and n are maximum. That is, 
and 
2 W 
Rnun = -pg(Cdmax S 
Wmax = g Poo(CL)maxnmax 
2(W/S) 
[6.52] 
[6.53] 
However, keep in mind that nmax is itself limited by (Cdmax via Eq. (6.23), repeated 
here: 
1 2 (Cdmax n - -p V max - 2 oo 00 W/S 
DESIGN CAMEO 
For an instantaneous mal)euver; the two design charac­
teristics that are important are the ·maximum lift coef­
ficient (CL )max and wing loading W / S. The minimum 
tum radius can be made smaller, and the maximum tum 
6.5 THE V-n DIAGRAM 
[6.23] 
rate can be made larger, by designing the airplane with 
a higher ( C dmax and a smaller W / S. For an instan­
taneous maneuver, the thrust-to-weight ratio does not 
play a role. 
There are structural limitations on the maximum load factor allowed for a given 
airplane. These structural limitations were not considered in th.e previous sections; 
let us examine them now. 
There are two categories of structural limitations in airplane design: 
1. Limit load factor. This is the boundary associated with permanent structural 
deformation of one or more parts of the airplane. If n is less than the limit load 
factor, the structure may deflect during a maneuver, but it will return to its 
original state when n = 1. If n is greater than the limit load factor, then the 
airplane structure will experience a permanent deformation, that is, it will incur 
structural damage. 
2. Ultimate load factor. This is the boundary associated with outright structural 
failure. If n is greater than the ultimate load factor, parts of the airplane will 
break. 

===== PDF PAGE 355 =====
342 
12 
10 
8 
6 
,:: 4 
~ .s 2 
~ 
"' 0 
...:i A 
0 
-2 
-4 
-6 
F'igure 6.7 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
Both the aerodynamic and structural limitations for a given airplane are illustrated 
in the V-n diagram, a plot of load factor versus flight velocity, as given in Fig. 6. 7. 
A V-n diagram is a type of "flight envelope" for a given airplane; it establishes the 
maneuver boundaries. Let us examine Fig. 6.7 in greater detail. 
The curve between points A and B in Fig. 6. 7 represents the aerodynamic limit on 
load factorimposed by ( C dmax. This curve is literally a plot of Eq. ( 6.23 ). The region 
above curve AB in the V-n diagram is the stall region. To understand the significance 
of curve AB better, consider an airplane flying at velocity V1, where Vi is shown in 
Fig. 6.7. Assume the airplane is at an angle of attack such that CL < (CL)max. This 
flight condition is represented by point 1 in Fig. 6.7. Now assume the angle of attack 
is increased to that for ( C dmax, keeping the velocity constant at Vi. The lift increases 
to its maximum value for the given Vi, and hence the local factor n = L / W reaches 
its maximum value for the given V1• This value of nmax is given by Eq. (6.23), and the 
corresponding flight condition is given by point 2 in Fig. 6.7. If the angle of attack 
is increased further, the wing stalls and the load factor decreases. Therefore, point 3 
in Fig. 6.7 is unobtainable in flight. Point 3 is in the stall region of the V-n diagram. 
Consequently, point 2 represents the highest possible load factor that can be obtained 
11.25-F G 
Positive ultimate load factor 
5 Structural damage 
7.5-B C 
I I Positive limit load factor 
I I 
I I 
¥ 3 4 I I 
Stall I I 
I I I I area I I 2 I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I V4 IV* I V5 
200 300 400 500 v~, knots 
Stall Negative limit load factor 
area Structural damage D 
Negative ultimate load factor 
I 
The V-n diagram for a typical jet trainer aircra~. Free-stream velocity V00 is given in 
knots. 1 knot (kn) = 1.15 mi/h. 

===== PDF PAGE 356 =====
CHAPTER 6 e Performance: Accelerated Flight 
at the given velocity Vi . As is increased, say, to a value of 
possible load factor nmax also increases, as 6.7. However, 
nme.x cannot be allowed to increase the structural 
limit load factor, given by B in Fig. 6. 7. 
The horizontal line BC denotes in the V-n diagram. 
The flight velocity At velocities higher 
than V*, say, the must so that 
the positive limit load factor is not exceeded. If is obtained at 
velocity V5, corresponding to 5 in Fig. 6.7, then structural damage or possibly 
structural failure will occur. The right-hand side of the V-n line CD, is 
a high-speed limit. At velocities higher than this limit of line 
CD), the dynamic pressure is than the design range for the 
exacerbate the consequences of other undesirable phenorr1e,1a 
speed flight, such as encountering a critical gust and 
aileron reversal, or surface divergence, and severe 
Any one of these phenomena in combination with the high 
cause structural damage or failure. The high-speed limit 
for the airplane; it should never be exceeded. By it is higher than the level 
flight maximum crnise velocity determined in Chapter 5, at least a factor 
of 1.2. It may be as high as the terminal dive of the aircraft. The bottom 
part of the V-n diagram, given curve AE and the horizontal J.ine ED in Fig. 6.7, 
corresponds to negative absolute angles of that and hence the 
load factors are negative quantities. Curve AE defines the stall limit. the wing is 
pitched downward to a large enough negative angle of the flow will separate 
from the bottom surface of the wing and the negative lift will decrease in 
that is, the wing "stalls.") Line ED gives the negative limit load 
structural damage will occur. Line HI gives the negative ultimate load factor beyond 
which strnctural failure will occur. 
For instantaneous maneuver performance, Bon the V-n diagram in Fig. 6.7 
is very important. This point is called the At this both and 
n are simultaneously at their highest values that can be obtained anywhere 
throughout the allowable envelope of the In turn, from and 
(6.53), this to the smallest 
turn radius and the largest instantaneous tum rate for the 
velocity corresponding to point B is called the corner 
V* in Fig. 6.7. The corner velocity can be obtained by 
yielding 
In Eq. the value of nmax 
velocity is an interesting 
possible to structurally 
V* = w 
s 
to that at Bin 6.7. The comer 
At flight velocities less than V*, it is not 
due to the of too much lift 
In contrast, at velocities greater than V*, lift can be obtained that can 

===== PDF PAGE 357 =====
DESIGN CAMEO 
Performruice 
damage the aircraft 
such a case. 
5 in 6. and the must make certain to avoid 
for our Gulfstream-like aircraft, assume the positive limit load factor is 4.5. Cakuiate the 
airplane's corner velocity at sea level. 
Solution 
From previous for this 76.84 lb/ft2 and (Cd,,,ax 1.2. Sin,;;e 
p00 = 0.002377 s!ug/ft 3 at sea level, Eq. (6.54) 
* / 2nmax W / 2(4.5)(76.84) = I 492 .4 ft/s 
V = V p00 (CLJmax S = Y (0.002377)(1.2) 
For airplane design, the limit load factor depends on 
t'Je type of aircraft. Some typical values for limit load 
factors are given below (Ref. 25). 
Note from the above table and Fig. 6.7 that the magni­
tudes of nneg are smaller than those for npos· This is a 
decision which reflects that 
Aircraft Type llpoo II neg 
Normal general aviation 2.5-3.8 -1--l.5 
Aerobatic general aviation 6 -3 
Civil transport 3-4 -l--2 
Fighter 6.5-9 -3--6 
The values shown in Fig. 6.7, namely, npos = 7.5 and 
nneg = -3.0, are for a typical military trainer aircraft 
under conditions of negative lift. 
Because most airplanes are constructed primarily 
from aluminum alloys, for which the ultimate allowable 
stress is about 50% greater than the yield stress, a factor 
of. safety of 1.5 is used between the ultimate 
load factor and the limit load factor. Note in Fig. 6.7 that 
the positive ultimate ioad factor is 7.5 x 1.5 = 11.25, 
and the negative uhimate load factor is -3.0 x 1.5 = 
-4.5. 
ENERGY CONCEPTS: Lk"-'"'-'~._,,~,-~, 
OF CLIMB 
The discussion of rate of 
that is, no acceleration. 
u0,,u,uµu~"' that the 
in Section 5.10 was limited to the case, 
some of the in Section 5.10 included the 
climb 8 was small enough that cos 8 ~ l . !n 

===== PDF PAGE 358 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
this section we remove those constraints and deal with the general case of accelerated 
rate of climb at any climb angle. Unlike the approach taken in all our performance 
analyses to this point, where we dealt with forces and invoked Newton's second law 
for our fundamental dynamic equation, in this present section we take a different 
approach where we will deal with energy concepts. Energy methods have been used 
since the 1970s for the analysis of airplane performance with acceleration. The subject 
of this section is an example of such energy methods. 
Energy Height Consider an airplane of mass m in flight at some altitude h and with 
some velocity V 00 • Due to its altitude, the airplane has potential energy equal to mgh. 
Due to its velocity, the airplane has kinetic energy equal to ! m V~. The total energy 
of the airplane is the sum of these energies, that is, 
Total aircraft energy = mgh + !m V~ [6.55] 
The specific energy, denoted by He, is defined as total energy per unit weight and is 
obtained by dividing Eq. (6.55) by W = mg. This yields 
or 
mgh + !mV 2 
H- 2 oo mgh + !mv 2 2 (X) 
e- W 
v2 
He =h+ ~ 
2g 
mg 
[6.56] 
The specific energy He has units of height and is therefore also called the energy 
height of the aircraft. Thus, let us become accustomed to quoting the energy of an 
airplane in terms.of its energy height He, always remembering that it is simply the 
sum of the potential and kinetic energies of the airplane per unit weight. Contours 
of constant He are given in Fig. 6.8, which is an "altitude-Mach number map." Here' 
the ordinate and abscissa are altitude h and Mach number M, respectively, and the 
dashed curves are lines of constant energy height. 
We can draw an analogy between energy height and money in the bank. Say 
that you have a sum of money in the bank split between a checking account and a 
savings account. Say that you transfer part of your money in the savings account 
into your checking account. You still have the same total; the distribution of funds 
between the two accounts is just different. Energy height is analogous to the total 
of money in the bank; the distribution between kinetic energy and potential energy 
can change, but the total will be the same. For example, consider two airplanes, one 
flying at an altitude of 30,000 ft at Mach 0.81 (point A in Fig. 6.8) and the other 
flying at an altitude of 10,000 ft at Mach 1.3 (point B in Fig. 6.8). Both airplanes 
have the same energy height of 40,000 ft (check this yourself). However, airplane A 
has more potential energy and less kinetic energy (per unit weight) than airplane B. 
If both airplanes maintain their same states of total energy, then both are capable of 
"zooming" to an altitude of 40,000 ft at zero velocity (point C in Fig. 6.8) simply by 
trading all their kinetic energy for potential energy. 
345 

===== PDF PAGE 359 =====
Example 6.4 
P A R T 2 Ill Airplane Perfonnance 
0 0.5 l.O 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Mach number M 
Figure 6.8 Altitude-Moch number map showing curves of conslan! 
energy heigh!. These are universal curves that represent 
the variation of kinetic and po!enlial energies per unit 
moss. They do noi depend on the specific design factors 
of a given airplane. 
Consider another airplane, flying at an altitude of 50,000 ft at Mach 1.85, denoted 
by point D in Fig. 6.8. This airpl!lne will have an energy height of 100,000 ft and 
is indeed capable of zooming to an actual altitude of 100,000 ft by trading all its 
kinetic energy for potential energy. Airplane D is in a much higher energy state 
(He = 100,000 ft) than airplanes A and B (which have He = 40,000 ft). Therefore 
airplane D has a much greater capability for speed and altitude performance than 
airplanes A and B. In air combat, everything else being equal, it is advantageous to 
be in a higher energy state (have a higher He) than your adversary. 
Consider an airplane flying at an altitude of 30,000 ft at a velocity of 540 mi/h. Calculate its 
energy height. 
Solution 
From Eq. (6.56), 
88 V00 = 540 x - = 792 ft/s 60 
v2 (792)2 I I He = h + -5:::?. = 30,000 + --- = 39,740 ft 2g 2(32.2) · 

===== PDF PAGE 360 =====
C H A P T E R 6 @ Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
Specific Excess Power How does an airplane change its energy state; for example, 
in Fig. 6.8, how could airplanes A and B increase their energy heights 
to equal that of 
D? The answer to this question has to do with specific excess power, defined below. 
Examine again Fig. 4.2, which illustrates an airplane in motion in the vertical 
plane, and Fig. 4.4, which gives the forces in the vertical plane. The equation of 
motion along the flight path is given by Eq. ( 4.5) which, assuming zero bank angle 
( ¢ = 0) and the thrust aligned in the direction of V 00 ( E = reduces to 
T - D - W sine = m -­dt 
Since m = W / g, Eq. (6.57) can be written as 
( l dV ) T - D = W sine+ g d; 
Multiplying by V 00 / W, we obtain 
TV00 - DV00 . V00 dV00 
----- = V00 sm8 + - --W g dt 
Recall from Eq. (5.79) that 
TV 00 - D V 00 = excess power 
[6.58] 
[5.79] 
We define specific excess power, denoted by Ps, as the excess power per unit weight. 
From Eq. (5.79), 
_ excess power _ TV00 - DV00 
Ps= W - W 
Also, recall from Eq. (5.77) that the rate of climb R/ C is expressed by 
R/C = V00 sine 
[6.59] 
[5.77] 
Since rate of climb is simply the time rate of change of altitude R/C = dh/dt, Eq. 
(5.77) can be written as 
dh V00 sine= -dt [6.60] 
Substituting Eqs. (6.59) and (6.60) into Eq. (6.58), we have 
[6.61] 
Equation (6.61) shows that an airplane with excess power can use this excess for rate 
of climb (dh/dt) or to accelerate along its flight path (dV /dt) or for a combination 
of both. Equation (6.61) helps to put our discussion in Section 5.10 in perspective. 
In Section 5.10 we assumed no acceleration, that dV00 /dt = 0. For this case, Eq. 
becomes 
dh Ps=-dt [6.62] 
347 

===== PDF PAGE 361 =====
348 P A· R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
In Section 5.10, our governing relation for steady climb was Eq. (5.80), rewritten 
here: 
Excess pow~r ---=R/C [6.63] w 
Equations (6.62) and (6.63) are the same equation. So our discussion in Section 5.10 
was based on a special form of Eq. (6.61), namely, Eq. (6.62). 
Specific excess power allows an increase in the energy height of an airplane, as 
follows. Return to the definition of energy height given by Eq. (6.56). Differentiating 
this expression with respect to time, we have 
dHe dh V00 dV00 
- = - + - -- [6.64] dt dt g dt 
The right-hand sides ofEqs. (6.61) and (6.64) are identical. Hence 
E1J 
[6.65] 
That is, the time rate of change of energy height is equal to the specific excess power. 
An airplane can increase its energy height simply by the application of excess power. 
In Fig. 6.8, airplanes A and B can reach the energy height of airplane D if they have 
enough specific excess power to do so. 
Question: How can we ascertain whether a given airplane has enough Ps to reach 
a certain energy height? The answer has to do with contours of constant Ps on an 
altitude-Mach number map. Let us see how such contours can be constructed. 
Ps Contours Return to Fig. 5.33, and recall that excess power is the difference be­
tween power available and power required. For a given altitude, say, h, the excess 
power (hence Ps) can be plotted versus velocity ( or Mach number); Ps first increases 
with velocity, then reaches a maximum, and finally decreases to zero as the velocity 
approaches Vmax for the airplane. This variation is sketched in Fig. 6.9a, which is a 
graph of Ps versus Mach number. Three curves are shown, each one corresponding 
to a given altitude. These results can be cross-plotted on an altitude-Mach number 
map using Ps as a parameter, as illustrated in Fig. 6.9b. For example, consider all the 
points on Fig. 6.9a where Ps = O; these correspond to points along a horizontal axis 
through Ps = 0, that is, points along the abscissa in Fig. 6.9a. Such points are labeled 
a, b, c, d, e, and fin Fig. 6.9a. Now replot these points on the altitude-Mach number 
map in Fig. 6.9b. Here, points a, b, c, d, e, and f form a bell-shaped curve, along 
which Ps = 0. This curve is called the Ps contour for Ps = 0. Similarly, all points 
with Ps = 200 ft/s are on the horizontal line AB in Fig. 6.9a, and these points can be 
cross-plotted to generate the Ps = 200 ft/s contour in Fig. 6.9b. In this fashion, an 
entire series of Ps contours can be generated in the altitude-Mach number map. 
The shapes of the curves shown in Fig. 6.9a and b are typical of a subsonic 
airplane. They look somewhat different for a supersonic airplane because of the effect 
of the drag-divergence phenomenon on drag, hence excess power. For a supersonic 
airplane, the P.-Mach number curves at different altitudes will appear as sketched in 

===== PDF PAGE 362 =====
CHAPTER 6 ® Performance: Accelerated 
~ 
~ 200 (a) 
-~ 
(b) 
Mach number M 
a subsonic 
fAach number. These contours are constructed 
for a fixed ioad if the load factor is 
changed, the P, contours wii! shift. 
is due to the mcrease 
in the transonic regime. For modem 
F- the maximum thrust available from the 
such as the LockJ1.eed-Martin 
is so large to the thrust 
near Mach 1 that the dent in the transonic is much less In 
tum, the curves in 6.1 Oa can be -,,,v.,.v" on the altitude-Mach number map, 
the P., contours as illustrated in 6.10b. to the double-hump 
curves in 6. contours in Fig. 6.1 Ob have different 
in the subsonic and c,rn,~rc;,m 
We can now answer the of how to asce1tain whether a 
has P, to reach a certain energy Let us 
6. and the curves for constant energy 
an altitude--Mach number map. This 
at a 
are universal curves that have 
usefuiness 
a 
6. L The Ps contours 
the curves for constant energy 
The 
establishes what energy 
for the 
349 

===== PDF PAGE 363 =====
350 
600 
200 
0 
Figure 6.10 
100 
90 
80 
70 
.<£ 
.g 50 
a ·= 
~ 40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
p A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
"" 
h3 
0) 
"O 
a ·= h4 ~ 
hi 
M 
1.0 2.0 0 
(a) 
Specific excess power contours for a supersonic airplane. 
--- ----- .__ 80,000 ft 
-.. ....... ...... 
--- ----
---
....... 
' ' ' 
1.0 1.5 
M!lch number M 
1.0 2.0 
Mach number M 
(b) 
2.5 
Figure 6.11 Overlay of P. contours and specific energy states on an altitude-Mach number map. The 
P, values shown here approximately correspond to a Lockheed F· 104G supersonic 
fighter. Load factor n = 1 and W = 18,000 lb. Airplane is at maximum thrust. The path 
given by points A through I is the Right path for minimum time to climb. 

===== PDF PAGE 364 =====
c H A P T E R 6 @ Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
envelope formed by the Ps = 0 contour. Hence, all values of He inside this envelope 
are obtainable by tb.e airplane. A comparison of figures like Fig. 6.11 for different 
airplanes will dearly show in what regions of altitude and Mach number an airpla..'1e 
has maneuver advantages over another. 
Rate of Climb and Time kl Climb (Accelerated Performance) Accelerated rate of climb 
and time to climb can be treated by energy considerations. T'ne rate of climb with 
acceleration is easily found from Eq. (6.61), repeated here: 
dh V00 dV00 
p =-+---
s dt g dt [6.61] 
Rate of climb Acceleration 
Consider an airplane at a given altitude and Mach number. This flight condition is 
represented by a specific point in the altitude-Mach number map, such as Fig. 6.9b. 
At this point, the airplane will have a certain value of Ps. Assume the airplane is 
accelerating, with a specified value of dV00 /dt = A. The rate of climb for this 
specified accelerated condition is, from Eq. (6.61), 
I 
I dh = p _ V00 A 
dt s g 
I 
[6.661 
In Eq. (6.66), all quantities on the right-hand side are known or specified; the equation 
gives the instantaneous maximum rate of climb that can be achieved at the instanta­
neous velocity V 00 and the instantaneous acceleration A. 
The time required for an airplane to change from one energy height He. I to a 
larger energy height He.2 can be obtained as follows. From Eq. (6.65), 
dt=­
Ps 
[6.67] 
Integrating Eq. (6.67) between time t1 where He = He. l and time t2 where He = He,2, 
we have 
[6.68] 
Since He= h + then 
He,2 -- l ( 2 2 ) 1=h2-h1+- Voo2-Vooi 2g ' ' 
or 
- h1 = He.2 -
For a given at energy height and a given V 00 , 1 at energy height He, 1, 
(6.69) gives the cb.ange in altitude - h 1 between these two conditions. 
(6.68) gives the time required to achieve this change in that is, it gives the 
:m 

===== PDF PAGE 365 =====
352 
Example 6.5 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
time to climb from altitude h1 to altitude h2 when the airplane has accelerated (or 
decelerated) from velocity V 00 , 1 at altitude h I to velocity V 00 , 2 at altitude h2• 
The time to climb t2 - t1 between He, 1 and He,2 is not a unique value-it depends 
on the flight path taken in the altitude-Mach number map. Examine again Fig. 6.11. 
In changing from He.I to H,,2 , there are an infinite number of variations of altitude 
and Mach number that will get you there. In terms of Eq. ( 6.68), there are an infinite 
number of different values of the integral because there are an infinite number of 
different possible variations of dH,/ Ps between H,,1 and H,,2. However, once a 
specific path in Fig. 6.11 is chosen between H,. 1 and H,.2 then d H, / Ps has a definite 
variation along this path, and a specific value of t2 - t1 is obtained. 
This discussion has particular significance to the calculation of minimum time 
to climb to a given altitude, which is a unique value. There is a unique path in the 
altitude-Mach number map that corresponds to minimum time to climb. We can see 
how to construct this path by examining Eq. (6.68). The time to climb will be a 
minimum when Ps is a maximum value. Looking at Fig. 6.11, for each He curve, 
we see there is a point where Ps is a maximum. Indeed, at this point the Ps curve 
is tangent to the H, curve. Such points are illustrated by points A to I in Fig. 6.11. 
The heavy curve through these points illustrates the variation of altitude and Mach 
number along the flight path for minimum time to climb. Along this path (the heavy 
curve), dH,/ Ps varies in a definite way, and when these values of dHe/ Ps are used 
in calculating the integral in Eq. (6.68), the resulting value of t2 - t1 is the minimum 
· time to climb between He.I and H,, 2. In general, there is no analytical form of the 
integral in Eq. (6.68); it is usually evaluated numerically. 
We note in Fig. 6.11 that the segment of the flight path between D and D' 
represents a constant energy dive to accelerate through the drag-divergence region 
near Mach 1. We also note that Eq. (6.68) gives the time to climb between two 
energy heights, not necessarily that between two different altitudes. However, at any 
given constant energy height, kinetic energy can be traded for potential energy, and 
the airplane can "zoom" to higher altitudes until all the kinetic energy is spent. For 
example, in Fig. 6.11 point I corresponds to Ps = 0. The airplane cannot achieve 
any further increase in energy height. However, after arriving at point I, the airplane 
can zoom to a minimum altitude equal to the value of He at point I -in Fig. 6.11, 
a maximum altitude well above 100,000 ft. After the end of the zoom, V 00 = 0 (by 
definition) and the corresponding value of h is the maximum obtainable altitude for 
accelerated flight conditions, achieved in a minimum amount of time. 
Consider an airplane with an instantaneous acceleration of 8 ft/s2 at an instantaneous velocity 
of 800 ft/s. At the existing flight conditions, the specific excess power is 300 ft/s. Calculate the 
instantaneous maximum rate of climb that can be obtained at these accelerated flight conditions. 
Solution 
From Eq. (6.66) 
dh = Ps - _Voo A= 300 - -80_0 (8) = ! 101 ft/s 
dt g 32.2 '-· __ ___J 

===== PDF PAGE 366 =====
C H A P T E R 6 ~ Airplane Performance: Accelerated 
TAKEOFF PERFORMANCE 
For the performance characteristics discussed so far in this book, we have considered 
the airplane in full flight in the air. However, for the next two sections, we come back 
to earth, and we explore the characteristics of takeoff and landing, many of which 
are concerned with the airplane rolling along the ground. These are accelerated 
performance problems of a special nature. 
Consider an airplane standing motionless at the end of a runway. This is denoted 
by location O in Fig. 6.12. The pilot releases the brakes and pushes the throttle to 
maximum takeoff power, and the airplane accelerates down the runway. At some 
distance from its starting point, the airplane lifts into the air. How much distance 
does the airplane cover along the runway before it lifts into the air? This is the central 
question in the analysis of takeoff performance. Called the ground roll ( or sometimes 
the ground run) and denoted by sg in Fig. 6.12, it is a major focus of this section. 
However, this is not the whole consideration. The total takeoff distance also includes 
the extra distance covered over the ground after the airplane is airborne but before 
it clears an obstacle of a specified height. This is denoted by sa in Fig. 6.12. The 
height of the obstacle is generally specified to be 50 ft for military aircraft and 35 
ft for commercial aircraft. The sum of s g and sa is the total takeoff distance for the 
airplane. 
The ground rolls g is further divided into intermediate segments, as shown in Fig. 
6.13. These segments are defined by various velocities, as follows: 
l. As the airplane accelerates from zero velocity, at some point it will reach the 
stalling velocity Vstall, as noted in Fig. 6.13. 
-------------------- ---
0 
Figure 6.12 Illustration of ground roll s9 , airborne distance s0 , and !otai takeoff distance. 
353 

===== PDF PAGE 367 =====
P A R T 2 ® Airplane Performance 
~--------------"' 
1 v,,.ll V mcg V mca V1 
I 
0 
Figure 6.13 Intermediate segments of the ground roll. 
2. The airplane continues to accelerate until it reaches the minimum control speed 
on the ground, denoted by Vmcg in Fig. 6.13. This is the rr1inimum velocity at which 
enough aerodynamic force can be generated on the vertical fin with rudder 
deflection while the airplane is still rolling along the ground to produce a yawing 
moment sufficient to counteract t.'1at produced when there is an engine failure for a 
multiengine aircraft. 
3. If the airplane were in the air (without the landing gear in contact with the 
ground), the minimum speed required for yaw control in case of engine failure is 
slightly greater than V.,,cg· This velocity is called the minimum control speed in the 
denoted by Vmca in Fig. 6.13. For tl-ie ground roll shown in Fig. 6.13, V:.,,ca is 
essentially a reference speed-the airplane is still on the ground when this speed is 
reached. 
4. The airplane continues to accelerate until it reaches the decision speed, denoted 
by Vi in Fig. 6.13. This is the speed at which the pilot can successfully continue the 
takeoff even though an engine failure (in a multiengine aircraft) would occur at that 
point. This speed must be equal to or larger than V mcg in order to maintain control of 
the airplane. A more descriptive name for V1 is the critical engine failure speed. If 
an engine fails before Vi is achieved, the takeoff must be stopped. If an engine fails 
after V1 is reached, the takeoff can still be achieved. 
5. The airplane continues to accelerate until the takeoff rotational speed, denoted 
by VR in Fig. 6.13, is achieved. At this velocity, the m1tiates elevator 
deflection a rotation of the airplane in order to increase the of attack, hence to 
increase Clearly, the maximum angle of attack achieved during rotation should 
not exceed the stalling angle of attack. Actually, all that is needed is an angle of 
attack high enough to produce a lift at the given larger than the so 
that the airplane will lift off the ground. even this angle of attack may not 

===== PDF PAGE 368 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
be achievable because the tail may drag the ground. (Ground clearance for the tail 
after rotation is an important design feature for the airplane, imposed by takeoff 
considerations.) 
6. If the rotation of the airplane is limited by ground clearance for the tail, the 
airplane must continue to accelerate while rolling along the ground after rotation is 
achieved, until a higher speed is reached where indeed the lift becomes larger than 
the weight. This speed is called the minimum unstick speed, denoted by Vmu in Fig. 
6.13. For the definition of Vmu, it is assumed that the angle of attack achieved during 
rotation is the maximum allowable by the tail clearance. 
7. However, for increased safety, the angle of attack after rotation is slightly less 
than the maximum allowable by tail clearance, and the airplane continues to 
accelerate to a slightly higher velocity, called the liftoff speed, denoted by Vw in 
Fig. 6.13. This is the point at which the airplane actually lifts off the ground. The 
total distance covered along the ground to this point is the ground roll s8 • 
The relative values of the various velocities discussed above, and noted on Fig. 
6.13, are all sandwiche,d between the value of Vsta11 and that for Vw, where usually 
Vw ~ 1.1 Vstall · A nice discussion of the relative values of the velocities noted in Fig. 
6.13 is contained in Ref. 41, which should be consulted for more details. 
Related to the above discussion is the concept of balanced field length, defined 
as follows. The decision speed Vi was defined earlier as the minimum velocity at 
which the pilot can successfully continue the takeoff even though an engine failure 
would occur at that point. What does it mean that the pilot "can successfully continue 
the takeoff" in such an event? The answer is that when the airplane reaches Vi, if an 
engine fails at that point,· then the additional distance required to clear the obstacle 
at the end of takeoff is exactly the same distance as required to bring the airplane to 
a stop on the ground. If we let A be the distance traveled by the airplane along the 
ground from the original starting point (point O in Fig. 6.13) to the point where Vi is 
reached, and we let B be the additional distance traveled with an engine failure (the 
same distance to clear an obstacle or to brake to a stop), then the balanced field length 
is by definition the total distance A + B. 
6.7.1 Calculation of Ground Roll 
The forces acting on the airplane during takeoff are shown in Fig. 6.14. In addition 
to the familiar forces of thrust, weight, lift, and drag, there is a rolling resistance R, 
caused by friction between the tires and the ground. This resistance force is given by 
R = µr(W- L) [6.70] 
where µr is the coefficient of rolling friction and W - L is the net normal force 
exerted between the tires and the ground. Summming forces parallel to the ground 
and employing Newton's second law, we have from Fig. 6.14 
dV00 
m--=T-D-R 
dt 
355 

===== PDF PAGE 369 =====
356 P A R T 2 fl Airplane Performance 
D 
w 
Figure 6.14 Forces acting on an airplane during takeoff and landing. 
or 
I dVoo II 
I m - = T - D - µ (W - L) dt r, I 
I 
[6.7'1] 
Equation ( 6. 71) is the equation of motion for the airplane during takeoff. 
Let us examine the terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (6.71). The engine 
thrust T in general varies with velocity during the ground roll. For a reciprocating 
engine/propeller combination, the power available is reasonably constant with V 00 
(see Section 3.3.1). Since P = TV00 , during the ground roll, 
Reciprocating engine/propeller 
const 
T=­
Voo 
[6.72] 
For a turbojet engine, T is reasonably constant with V 00 for the ground roll ( see 
Section 3.4.l). 
Turbojet T = const [6.73J 
For a turbofan engine, T deceases slightly with V 00 during the ground roll. An example 
for the Rolls-Royce RB21 l-535E4 turbofan was given by Eq. (3.22). Following this 
example, we can write for a turbofan engine during the ground roll 
Turbofan [6.74] 
where the values of kt, kl, and ki are constants obtained from the performance 
characteristics for a given engine. 
The drag Din Eq. (6.71) varies with velocity according to 
[6.75] 
However, during the ground roll, Cn in Eq. (6.75) is not the same value as given by 
the conventional drag polar used for full flight in the atmosphere; the conventional 

===== PDF PAGE 370 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
drag polar is given by Eq. (2.47), repeated here: 
Cv = Cv,o + KCI [2.47] 
This is for two primary reasons: (1) With the landing gear fully extended, C D,O is larger 
than when the landing gear is retracted; and (2) there is a reduction in the induced drag 
due to the close proximity of the wings to the ground-part of the "ground effect." 
An approximate expression for the increase in C v.o due to the extended landing gear 
is given in Ref. 41 as 
w fi.C _ -K m-o.21s D,0 - s UC (6.76] 
where W /Sis the wing loading, mis the maximum mass of the airplane, and the factor 
Kuc depends on the amount of flap deflection. With flap deflection, the average airflow 
velocity over the bottom of the wing is lower than it would be with no flap deflection; 
that is, the deflected flap partially blocks the airflow over the bottom surface. Hence, 
the landing gear drag is less with flap deflection than its value with no flap deflection. 
In Eq. (6.76), when W / S is in units of newtons per square meter and m is in units 
of kilograms, Kuc = 5.81 x 10- 5 for a zero flap deflection and 3.16 x 10- 5 for 
maximum flap deflection. These values are based on correlations for a number of 
civil transports, and are approximate only. In regard to the induced drag during the 
ground roll, the downwash is somewhat inhibited by the proximity of the ground, 
and hence the induced drag contribution is less than that included in Eq. (2.47); that 
is, for the ground roll, K in Eq. (2.47) must be reduced below that for the airplane 
in flight. The reduction in the induced drag coefficient can be approximated by the 
relation from Ref. 50 given here 
Cv, (in-ground effect) (16h/b) 2 
--------- =G = -~~~-
Cv, (out-of-ground effect) 1 + (16h/b) 2 
(6.77] 
where h is the height of the wing above the ground and b is the wingspan. To return 
to our discussion of the drag polar in Section 2.9.2, the value of k3 in Eq. (2.44) is 
reduced by the factor G due to ground effect. Also, because wave drag does not occur 
at the low speeds for takeoff, k2 = 0 irt Eq. (2.44). With all tbe above in mind, the 
conventional drag polar given by Eq. (2.47) should be modified to account for the 
effects during ground roll. Returning to Eqs. (2.44) and (2.45), we can approximate 
the drag polar during ground roll as 
(6.78] 
where Cv,o and k1 in Eq. (6.78) are the same values given by the conventional flight 
drag polar-fi.Cv,o is given by Eq. (6.76), and G is given by Eq. (6.77). 
The value of the coefficient ofrolling friction in Eq. (6.71) depends on the type 
of ground surface that the airplane is rolling on. It also depends on whether the wheel 
brakes are off or on. Obviously, during takeoff the brakes are off, and during landing 
the brakes are usually on. Some representative values of J,lr are listed in Table 6.1, as 
obtained from Ref. 25. 
357 

===== PDF PAGE 371 =====
358 PART 2 @ Performance 
Table 6.1 
µ,(Typical Values) 
Surface Brakes off Brakes on 
Dry concrete/asphalt 0.03-0.05 0.3--0.5 
Wet concrete/asphalt 0.05 0.15--0.3 
Icy concrete/aspha,t 0.02 0.06-0.lO 
Hard turf 0.05 0.4 
Finn dirt 0.04 0.3 
Soft turf 0.07 0.2 
Wet grass 0.08 0.2 
To return to the right-hand side of Eq. (6.71), the weight Wis usually considered 
to be constant, although it is slightly decreasing due to the fuel's being consumed 
during takeoff. The lift L is given by 
[6.79] 
In Eq. (6.79), the lift coefficient is that for the angle of attack of the airplane rolling 
along the ground. In tum, the angle of attack during ground roll is essentially a design 
feature of the airplane, determined by the built-in incidence angle of the wing chord 
line relative to the fuselage, and by the built-in orientation of the centerline of the 
airplane relative to the ground due to the different height of the main landing gear 
relative to that of the nose ( or tail) wheel. The value of CL in Eq. (6.79) also depends 
on the extent to which the wing high-lift devices are employed during takeoff. Raymer 
(Ref. 25) states that CL for the ground roll is typically less than 0.1. Of course, during 
the rotation phase near the end of the ground roll (see Fig. 6.13), the value of CL will 
increase, and it is frequently limited by the amount of tail clearance. Hence, CL in 
Eq. (6.79) is primarily determined (and limited) by features of the geometric design 
configuration of the airplane rolling along the ground. 
A detailed calculation of the ground roll can be made by numerically solving Eq. 
(6.71) for V00 = V (t), where in this equation D, and Lare variables which take on 
their appropriate instantaneous values at each instant during the ground roll. For the 
numerical solution ofEq. (6.71), T can be expressed by Eq. (6.72) for a reciprocating 
engine/propeller combination, Eq. (6.73) for a turbojet, or Eq. (6.74) for a turbofan. 
The drag is expressed by Eq. (6.75) where Co is given by Eq. (6.78). The lift is given 
by Eq. (6.79). From the numerical solution of Eq. (6.71), we obtain a tabulation of 
V00 versus t, starting with V00 = 0 at t = 0 and ending when V00 = Vw. The value 
of Vw is prescribed in advance; it is usually set equal to l. l V mu, where V mu is the 
minimum unstick speed described earlier. Because of the limited tail clearance of 
many airplanes, the minimum unstick speed corresponds to a value of CL < (CL )max, 
and hence V mu > Vsian, as clearly shown in Fig. 6.13. As a result, the specified value 
of Vw is dose to 1.1 Vsiall · The value oft that exists when reaches Vw is denoted 
by tw, the liftoff time. The grounJ roll sg, can then be obtained from 

===== PDF PAGE 372 =====
or 
or 
C H A P T E R 6 0 Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
ds ds = -dt = V00 dt dt 
t' (LO 
Jo ds = Jo Vxdt 
rw s8 = Jo Vxdt [6.80] 
The integral in Eq. (6.80) is evaluated numerically, using the tabulated values of V 00 
versus t obtained from the numerical solution of Eq. (6.7 
Approximate Analysis of Ground Roll The numerical solution of the governing equa­
tion of motion described above does not readily identify the governing design param­
eters that determine takeoff performance. Let us extract these parameters from an 
approximate analysis of ground roll as follows. 
Recalling that s is the distance along the ground, we can write 
ds dt ds = -dt = V00 dt = V00 --dV00 
dt dV00 
or 
V00 dV00 d(V~) ds= =----
dV00/dt 2(dV00 /dt) 
[6.81] 
Let us now construct an appropriate expression for dV00 /dt to be inserted into Eq. 
(6.81). Returning to Eq. (6.71), we have 
dV00 1 dt = m [T - D - tLr(W - L)] [6,82] 
Substituting Eqs. (6.75) and (6.79) into Eq. (6.82), and noting that m = W/g, we 
have 
-- = - T - -p V SCv - µ W - -p V SCL dVoo g [ 1 2 ( 1 2 )J dt W 2 oo oo r . 2 oo oo 
or 
dVoo _ [I_ _ _ Poo C _ y2 J 
dt - g W /.lr 2(W/S) ( D µrCL) oo [6.83] 
In Eq. (6.83), Cv is given by Eq. (6.78). Hence, recalling that k3 = 1/(neAR), we 
have 
dVoo { T Poo [· ( , G ) 2 J 2 } dt = g w - µ, - 2(W/S) Cn,o + !:,.CD,0 + k1 T rreAR cl - µ,CL v"" 
359 

===== PDF PAGE 373 =====
360 PART 2 ® Performance 
This is the expression for 
appearance of the 
, T 
KT= W - Pr 
( G \ +,k1+--- I 
\ neAR/ + 
Then can be written as 
Eq. 
Integrating Eq. 
we have 
dt=g + 
into we have 
between s = 0 where = 0 and s = s g where 
Up to this no have been made. The values of and vary 
with during the and if this vasiation is taken into account, a 
numerical evaluation of the integral in Eq. 
The in 
KA are constant during the 
given by Eqs. (6.85) and 
1. 
assumption is to consider T in 
V00 = 0.7Vw, 
2. is constant This is a reasonable <>ccnrr,nt, 
of rA1'<>t, r,n 
that KT and 
and 
turbofan. 

===== PDF PAGE 374 =====
C H A P T E R 6 @ Airplane Performance: Accelerated 
Thus, by assuming KT and K .. \ are constant in Eq. (6.89), periorming the integration, 
and a distance equal to NVw for the rotation phase (where N = 3 for large 
aircraft and N = l for small aircraft), .the ground roll can be a01orcix11nated 
[6.90] 
With Eq. a evaluation of the ground roll can be made. 
An analytic form for s~ that more clearly ilh1strates the design parameters that 
govern takeoff performance can be obtained substituting (6.82) directly into 
Eq. (6.81), obtaining 
Integrating Eq. 
have 
m d(V~) els = - ---------
2 T - D - f.J..r - L) 
from point O to and again noting that m we 
w 
Sg = -
VLO V~) 
T - D - tlr(W - L) 
In Eq. T - D - µ, ( W - is the net force acting in the horizontal direction on 
the airplane during takeoff. In Fig. 6.15. a schematic is shown of the variation of the 
forces acting during takeoff as a function of distance along the ground. Note that the 
net force T - D- f.lr identified in Fig. 6.15. does not var; greatly. 
This some to that the expression T - D - µ,, is 
constant up to the point of rotation. lf we take this net force to be constant at a value 
~----" ilie_P"~'-"~Ckcoff,_L ': _1¥_ -- -
I L 
~--r-.--..._._; 
I i 
T - [D + mr(W - l)] ! 
I I / 
I / i 
D. + m (W - L) ---- .... ~. 
::::.:.~-:rw " ! 
~ 
0 Distance along grounds s 8 
6. 15 Schematic of a typical variation of forces 
acting on on airplane during takeoff. 

===== PDF PAGE 375 =====
362 P A R T 2 ® Airplane Performance 
equal to i.ts value at V00 = O.?Vw, then Eq. (6.92) is easily integrated, giving 
WVf0 [ 1 l s8 = -- . J + NVw 2g T - D - µ,,(W - L) o.1vw 
[6.93] 
where the term N Vw has been added to account for that part of the ground roH during 
rotation, as noted earlier. 
The velocity at liftoff Vw should be no less than 1.1 V5ta11, where from Eq. (5.67) 
2 W ---
Poo S (Cdmax 
Vs1a11 = 
In Eq. (5.67), (Cdmax is that value with the flaps extended for takeoff; also keep 
in mind that (Cdmax may be a smaller value if the angle of attack is limited by tail 
clearance with the ground. Setting Vw = 1.1 V,1an and inserting Eq. (5.67) into Eq. 
(6.93), we have 
l.2l(W/S) 2 W s - ------------------ + 1.lN -----
8 - o0 Poo(Ci)mov [T/ w - D/ w - µ, (1 - W)] p s (C1) = 0.7VLO . oo - max 
[6.94] 
The design parameters that have an important effect on takeoff ground roH are dearly 
seen from Eq. (6.94). Specifically, sg depends on wing loading, thrust-to-weight ratio, 
and maximum lift coefficient. From Eq. (6.94) we note that 
1. s 8 increases with an increase in W / S. 
2. Sg decreases with an increase in (Cdmax· 
3. sg decreases with an increase in T / W. 
Equation (6.94) can be simplified by assuming lhat Tis much larger than D + 
µ,(W - L); as seen from Fig. 6.15, this is a reasonable assumption. Also, neglect 
the contribution to sg due to the rotation segment. With this, Eq. (6.94) can be 
approximated by 
l.2l(W /S) 
Sg~-------
gpoo(CL)max(T / W) 
[6.95] 
Equation (6.95) dearly illustrates some important physical trends: 
1. The ground roll is very sensitive to the weight of the airplane via both W / S and 
T / W. For if the weight is doubled, else the same, then 
W /Sis doubled and T / W is halved, to a factor-of-4 increase in s8 • 
Essentially, Sg varies as 
2. The roll is dependent on the ambient through both the 
appearance of Poo in Eq. (6.95) and the effect of Poo on T. If we assume that 
T ex Poo, then (6.95) shows that 

===== PDF PAGE 376 =====
C H A P T E R 6 ~ Airplane Performance: Accelerated Right 
This is why on hot, summer days, when the air density is less than that on cooler 
days, a given airplane requires a longer ground roll to get off the ground. Also, 
longer ground rolls are required at airports located at higher altitudes (such as 
Denver, Colorado, a mile above sea level). 
3. The ground roll can be decreased by increasing Hie wing area (decreasing 
W / S), increasing the thrust (increasing T / W), and increasing ( C dmax, all of which 
simply make common sense. 
6.7.2 Calculation of Distance While Airborne to Clear 
an Obstacle 
Return to Fig. 6.12 and recall that the total takeoff distance is equal to the ground roll 
s8 and the extra distance required to clear a.11 obstacle after becoming airborne Sa, In 
iliis section, we consider the calculation of Sa. 
The flight path after liftoff is sketched in Fig. 6.16. This is essentially the pull-up 
maneuver discussed in Section 6.3. In Fig. 6.16, R is the turn radius given by Eq. 
(6.41), repeated here: 
v~ R = --'-'-
g(n - 1) 
[6.41] 
Dming the airborne phase, Federal Air Regulations (FAR) require that V00 in­
crease from 1.1 Vstall at liftoff to 1.2 Vstall as it clears the obstacle of height hoB. There­
fore, we assume that V 00 in Eq. (6.41) is an average value equal to L 15 Ysia!I· The load 
factor n in Eq. (6.41) is obtained as follows, The average lift coefficient during this 
airborne phase is kept slightly less than ( C dmax for a margin of safety; we assume 
CL = 0.9(Cdmax· Hence, 
figure 6.16 Sketch for the calculation of dis!ance while 
airborne. 

===== PDF PAGE 377 =====
Example 6.6 
P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
L !Poo(l.15Vstan)2S(0.9)(CL)max n = ~ = ~~~~~~~~-~~-
W W 
From Eq. (5.67), the weight in Eq. (6.96) can be expressed in terms of (Cdmax and 
Vstall as 
W = !Poo(Vstan)2S(CL)max 
Substituting Eq. (6.97) into Eq. (6.96), we have 
! Poo(l .15VstaH)2 S(0.9)(C dmax 
n = ----~---~---
! Poo(Vstan)2S(C L)max 
or 
n = 1.19 
Returning to Eq. (6.41), with V00 = l.15Vstall and n = 1.19, we have 
(1.15Vsta!l)2 
R=-----g(l.19 - 1) 
or 
R = _6._9_6_( V~?=1a1~) 
g [6.98] 
In Fig. 6.16, lio8 is the included angle of the flight path between the point of 
takeoff and that for clearing the obstacle of height h08 . From this figure, we see that 
R - hoB hoB 
Cos lioB = = l - -R R 
or 
J ( hoB) 8oB = cos- l - R [6.99] 
Also from the geometry of Fig. 6.16, we have 
Sa = R sin8oB [6,100] 
In summary, to calculate the distance along the ground covered by the airborne 
segment: 
l. Calculate R from Eq. (6.98). 
2. For the given obstacle height h08 , calculate 608 from Eq. (6.99). 
3. Calculate Sa from Eq. 
Calculate the total takeoff distance for our Gulfstream-like airplane at standard sea level, as­
suming a takeoff gross weight of 73,000 lb. The design features of the are the same 
as those given in Example 5.1, with the added information that the wingspan is 75 ft. Assume 
that the variation of engine thrust with during takeoff is given by Eq. (6.74), where 

===== PDF PAGE 378 =====
CHAPTER Performance: Accelerated Flight 
k; = 27,700 lb, k2 = 2L28 lb,s/ft, and k! = 1.117 x 10- 2 . The of the wing 
above the ground the ground roll is 5.6 ft. Assume the runway is dry concrete, with 
V, = 0.04. 
Soh;tfon 
The total takeoffdistance, as shown in Fig. 6.12, is the sum and sa. Let us first calculate the 
roll Sg, using Eq. (6.90). The information needed in Eq. (6.90) is obtained as follows. 
The liftoff VLo is chosen to be to 1.1 Vstall · Our Gulfstream-like airplane is 
based on the data in Table 5.3 for flaps deflected in 
cos A = 2.1. As mentioned in Example 5.12, the sweep 
A= 27°40'. Hence, (Cdmax = 2.l cos27°40' = 1.86. From Eq. (5.7), 
/2 W-1 JI 2(76.84) 
Ystall = 1 -·- ~ --- =. = 186.4 ft/s ·· V Poo S (Cdmax . (0.002377)(1.86) 
Hence, 
Vw = U VstaH = 1.1 (] 86.4) = 205. l ft/s 
From Eq. (6.85), evaluated at V 00 = 0.7Vw, 
To evaluate, T at 0.7Vw, use Eq. (6.74) as follows. 
T = kI - kI V,0 + k; V;, = 27,700 - 21.28 V 00 + 1.117 X 
Since 0.7Vw = 0.7(205.1) = 143.6 ft/s, 
Thus, 
T = 27,700 - 21.28(143.6) + 1.117 x 10- 2 (143.6)2 
= 27,700 - 3,055.8 + 230.3 = 24,875 lb 
KT= 
T 
w 
24,875 
= -- - 0.04 = 0.301 73,000 
For the evaluation of KA as by Eq. (6.86), the following information is needed. From 
Example 5.1, Co,o = 0.015. The increase in the zero-lift drag coefficient due to the extended 
gear is estimated in (6.76), where we will assume that Kuc is approximately 
4.5 x 10- 5 for the case of moderate flap deflection (see previous discussion in Section 6.7.1). 
~""mw" (6.76) is repeated here: 
Ar WK -o.ns u.~o.o = S •ucm 
where is in units of newtons per square meter and m is in units of kiiograms. Since 1 lb 
= 4.448 N, 1 ft= 0.3048 m, and 1 lbm = 0.4536 kg, we have 
W 73,000 lb 4.448 N ( 1 ft \ 2 2 
- = 2 --- I l = 3,679N/m S 950ft llb \0.3048m} 
_ rn .. 0.4536 kg _ , , m - 73,0uv lbm-l~b. -·· 3.,, d3 
,n 
365 

===== PDF PAGE 379 =====
P A R T 2 ~ Airplane Performance 
Therefore, 
liCv,o = ; Kucm- 0·215 = (3,679)(4.5 x 10- 5)(33,113)- 0·215 = 0.0177 
It is interesting to note that the zero-lift drag coefficient is more than doubled by the extended 
landing gear. The value of k1 in Eq. (6.86) was given in Example 5.1; k1 = 0.02. Also given 
in Example 5.1 is e = 0.9. In Eq. (6.86), G is obtained from Eq. (6.77). 
(16h/b)2 [16(5.6/75)] 2 _ 1.427 _ O G= - -- - .588 1 + (16h/b)2 1 + [16(5.6/75)]2 2.427 
Finally, as discussed in 
Section 6.7.I, we will assume that Cl = 0.1 during the ground roll. 
Therefore, from Eq. (6.86), 
KA= - 2(;/S) [ Cv,o + t;.Cv,o + (k1 + ,re~R) cf - µ,Cl J 
-0.002377 { [ 0.588 J } = 2(76.48) 0.015 + 0.0177 + 0.02 + ;rr(0.9)(5.92) (0.1)2 - (0.04)(0.1) 
=.: -(l.547 X 10-5)(0.0327 + 0.00055 - 0.004) 
= -(1.547) X 10-5)(0.02925) = -4.525 X 10-7 
In the above calculation for KA, note that the contribution due to zero-lift drag 
Cv,o + liCv,o = 0.0327 
is much larger than that for drag due to lift 
(k1 + ;rre:R) cf= 0.00055 
From Eq. (6.90), letting N = 3, we have 
s8 = - 1- ln (1 + KA Vlo) + NVw 2gKA Kr 
1 [ -4.525 X 10-7 z] = 2(32.2)(-4.525 x 10-1) In 1 + 0.301 (205.1) + 3(205.1) 
= 2,242 + 615 = 2,857 ft 
To calculate the airborne segment of the total takeoff distance s0 , that is, that distance covered 
over the ground while airborne necessary to clear a 35-ft obstacle, we use Eqs. (6.98) to (6.100). 
From Eq. (6.98) 
R = 6.96(Vstall)2 = 6.96(186.4) 2 = 7,510 ft 
g 32.2 
From Eq. (6.99) 
( hoB) ( 35 ) 0 
e0 B = cos- 1 1 - - = cos- 1 l - ~ = 5.534 R 1,~IO 
From Eq. (6. !00) 
Sa = R sin eoB = 7,510 sin 5.534° = 724 ft 

===== PDF PAGE 380 =====
CHAPTER 6 ~ 
Hence, 
Total takeoff distance = s g + s0 = 2,857 + 724 = I 3,581 ft 
It is int,ere,stir,g to compare the above calculation for s 8 with the more apiiroium,ate relation 
given by Eq. 
l.21(W/S) 
f ~-------
"g W) 
""'""""';; T/W at V00 = 0.7Vw, as carried out earlier in this "A<'"'I""' we have T/W = 
24,875/73,000 = 0.341. Hence, (6.95) 
(l.21)(76.84) , c 
Sg""' ----------- = 1,915!.t .86)(0.341) 
If we add the 615 ft covered during t..lJ.e rotation phase, which is n,,,,1,,r·I"" in Eq. (6.95), we 
have 
Sg = 1,915 + 615 = 2,530 ft 
This is to be with the value s8 = 2,857 ft obtained earlier. Hence, the greatly 
,m,1-''•"'"" expression given Eq. leads to a value for sg that is only 11 % lower than 
that obtained by using our more precise analysis carried out above. 
6.8 LANDING 
The analysis of the landing nM1'1wm of an airplane is somewhat analogous to 
that for takeoff, in reverse. Consider an on a landing approach. The 
landing distance, as sketched in 
which is ta.ken to be 50 ft in 
approach with angle 
the instant it dears the vv,,.m,,v, 
6.17, begins when the airplane clears an obstacle, 
At that instant the is following a straight 
6.17. The velocity of the airplane at 
Va, is to be equal to 1.3 Ysta1l for 
for airplanes. At a distance above the 
ground, the airplane the flare, which is the transition from the straight approach 
path 
to the horizontal ground roll. The flight for the flare can be considered a 
circular arc with radius as shown in Fig. 6.17. The distance measured along 
the ground from the obstacle to the of initiation of the flare is the approach 
distance sa. Touchdown occurs when the wheels touch the ground. The distance 
over the ground covered the flare is the flare distance sf. The velocity at 
the touchdown is 1.15 for commercial and 1.1 for military 
airplanes. After the airplane is in free roll for a few seconds before the 
pilot applies the brakes and/or thrust reverser. The free-roll distance is short enough 
that the velocity over this length is assumed constant, to Vm, The distance that 
the airplane rolls on the ground from touchdown to the where the vel~ity _goes 
to zero is called the ground roll sg. 

===== PDF PAGE 381 =====
368 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
Free roll 
Approach distance Flare distance Ground roll 
0 
-------------- Total landing distance --------------"'i 
Figure 6.17 The landing path and landing distance. 
6.8. l Calculation of Approach Distance 
Examining Fig. 6.17, we see that the approach distance Sa depends on the approach 
angle ea and the flare height hf. In turn, ea depends on T / W and L / D. This can be 
seen from Fig. 6.18, which shows the force diagram for an aircraft on the approach 
flight path. Assuming equilibrium flight conditions, from Fig. 6.18, 
L = Wcosea [6.101] 
D = T + Wsinea [6.102] 
From Eq. (6.102), 
D-T D T sine = --- = - - -
a W W W [6.103] 

===== PDF PAGE 382 =====
C H A P T E R 6 e Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
I 
I 
--I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
',, 
', w 
Figure 6, 18 Force diagram for an airplane on the landing 
approach Righi paih. 
The approach angle is usually small for most cases. For example, Raymer (Ref. 25) 
states that for transport aircraft ea ::=:: 3°. Hence, cos ea ~ 1 and from Eq. (6.101), 
L ~ W. In this case, Eq. (6.103) can be written as 
sine = - 1- - !_ 
a L/D W [6.104] 
The flare height hf, shown in Fig. 6.17, can be calculated from the construction shown 
in Fig. 6.19 as follows. 
[6.H)5] 
However, because the circular arc flight path of the flare is tangent to both the approach 
path and the ground, as shown in Fig. 6.19, e1 = ea. Hence, Eq. (6.105) becomes 
hf= R(l - cos8a) [6.106] 
In Eq. (6.106), R is obtained from Eq. (6.41) by assuming that V00 varies from Va = 
1.3Vs1a11 for commercial aircraft and 1.2Ysiall for military aircraft to Vm = l.15Vsta11 
for commercial aircraft and 1.1 Ysta1l for military aircraft, yielding an average velocity 
during the flare of V f = 1.23 Vsta11 for commercial airplanes and 1.15 V,1811 for military 
airplanes. With the load factor n stipulated as n = 1.2, Eq. (6.41) yields 
y2 
R = _! [6.107] 
0.2g 
Finally, with R given by Eq. (6.107) and Ba from Eq. (6.104), h1 can be calculated 
from Eq. (6.106). In turn, Sa is obtained from Fig. 6.17 as 
50-ht 
Sa= 
Tan&a 
[6~ 108] 
369 

===== PDF PAGE 383 =====
370 P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
R 
----si---">1•1 
Figure 6.19 Geometry of the landing Acre. 
6.8.2 Calculation of Flare Distance 
The flare distance sf, shown in Figs. 6.17 and 6.19, is given by 
SJ= R sine! 
Since 81 = Ba, this becomes 
SJ= R sin ea 
6.8.3 Cakulation of Ground Ron 
[6.109] 
The force diagram for the airplane during the landing ground roll is the same as that 
shown in Fig. 6.14. Hence, the equation of motion is the same as Eq. (6.71). However, 
normal landing practice assumes that upon touchdown, the engine thrust is reduced 
to idle (essentially zero). In this case, with T = 0, Eq. (6.71) becomes 
dV00 
mdt=-D-µ,(W-L) [6.110] 
Many jet aircraft are equipped with thrust reversers which typically produce a negative 
thrust 0qual in magnitude to 40% or 50% of the maximum forward thrust. Some re·· 
ciprocating engine/propeHer-driven airplanes are equipped with reversible propellers 
that can produce a negative thrust equal in magnitude to about 40% of the static 
forward thrust. For turboprops, this increases to about 60%. In such cases, if Trev 
denotes the absolute magnitude of the reverse thrust, then Eq. (6.71) becomes 
dV, . 
m d;=-Trev-D-µ.,(W-L) 

===== PDF PAGE 384 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
Also, the value of Din Eqs. (6.110) and (6.111) can be increased by deploying 
spoilers, speed brakes:or drogue chutes. Note that in both Eqs. (6.110) and (6.111), 
dV00 /dt will be a negative quantity; that is, the airplane will decelerate (obviously) 
during the landing ground run. 
An expression for s8 can be obtained in the same fashion as in Section 6.7.1. 
From Eq. (6.111), 
{ Trev Poo [ ( G ) 2 J 2 } =-g W+µ,,+ 2(W/S) Cv,o+~Cv,o+ k1+1reAR Ci-µ,,Ci V00 
Defining the symbols 
Trev Ir=-+µ,, w 
JA = 2(~is) [ Cn,o + ~CD,G + (k1 + ;re:R) cf - µ,,CL] 
We can write Eq. (6.112) as 
dV: ' ,t 
~=-g(Jr+JAV!) dt 
Substituting Eq. (6.115) into Eq. (6.81), we have 
ds = d(V!) = 
2(dV00 /dt) 
d(V!) 
[6.112] 
[6.113] 
[6.114] 
[6.115] 
[6.116] 
Let us apply Eq. (6.116) beginning at the end of the free-roll segment shown in 
Fig. 6.17. Integrating Eq. (6.116) between the end of the roll, wheres = srr and 
V00 = VTD, and the complete stop, wheres=;: s8 and V00 = 0, we have 
l
sg 10 d(V!) ds- -
sr, - Vro 2g(Jr + JA V~) 
or 
{Vro d(V!) 
Sg - Sfr = lo 2g(Jr + JA V~) [6.117) 
Equation (6.117) for landing is directly analogous to Eq. (6.89) for takeoff; Note that 
no simplifications have been made in obtaining Eq. (6.117); the values of Ir and JA 
vary with V 00 during the ground roll. 
371 

===== PDF PAGE 385 =====
372 P A R T 2 @ Airplane Performance 
However, if we assume that h and J A in Eq. ( 6.117) can be assumed constant, 
Eq. (6.117) becomes 
1 ( JA 2 ) s8 - srr = -- ln 1 + -VTD 2gJA Jr 
[6.H8] 
According to Raymer (Ref. 25), the free roll depends partly on pilot technique and 
usually lasts for l to 3 s. Letting N be the time increment for the free roll, we have 
Sfr = N Vm. Then Eq. ( 6.118) yields for the total ground roll s g 
l ( ]A 2 ) sg = NVrn + -, - In 1 + -VTD 2gJA Jr 
[6.119] 
Equation (6.119) for the landing ground roll is analogous to Eq. (6.90) for the takeoff 
ground roll. With Eq. (6.119), a quick analytical solution of the ground roll for landing 
can be made. 
An analytic form for s8 that more closely illustrates the design parameters that 
govern landing performance can be obtained by substituting Eq. (6.111) directly into 
Eq. (6.81), obtaining 
m d(V~) ds = - ------'-"------
2 -Trev - D - µ,,(W - L) [6.120] 
Integrating Eq. (6.120) from Sfr to sg and noting that m = W / g, we have 
W Jo d(V~) . 
Sg - Sfr = -2g Vm -Trev - D - /1,,(W - L) 
or 
W 1Vm d(Voo2) s8 = NVw + - ---------2g o T,ev+D+µ,,(W-L) 
[6.121] 
In Eq. (6.121), Trev+ D + µ,(W - L) is the net force acting in the horizontal direction 
on the airplane during the landing ground roll. In Fig. 6.20, a schematic is shown of 
the variation of forces acting during the landing ground roll, with the exception of Trev. 
The application of thrust reversal is a matter of pilot technique, and it may be applied 
only for a certain segment of the ground roll. If this is the case, Eq. ( 6.121) must be 
integrated in segments, with and without T,ev· In any event, the force D + µ,,(W - L) 
in Fig. 6.20 is reasonably constant withs. If we assume that Trev is also constant, then 
it is reasonable to assume that the expression Trev + D + /.Lr ( W - is a constant, 
evaluated at a value equal to its .value at V00 = 0.7Vw. Then Eq. (6.121) is easily 
integrated, giving 
WVfo [ l J s8 = NVw+--
2g Trev+ D + µ,(W - L) o,7Vw 

===== PDF PAGE 386 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
v+ro/W:_0.--
----------1,._w-L) 
tt'r 
Distance along ground s s=O 
Figure 6.20 Schematic of a typical variation of forces acting 
on an airplane during landing. 
The touchdown velocity Vm should be no less than j V51a11, where j = 1.15 for 
commercial airplanes and j = 1.1 for military airplanes. Since from Eq. (5.67) 
Ystall = 
2 W 1 
Poo S (Cdmax 
[5.67] 
then Eq. (6.122) can be written as 
. 2 W 1 j2(W/S) 
Sg = JN ----- + ------------------Poo S (Cdmax gpoo(Cdmax [Trev/W + D/W + µ, (1 - L/W)]o.7Vm 
[6.123) 
Equation (6.123) for the landing ground roll is analogous to Eq. (6.94) for the takeoff 
ground roll. The design parameters that have an important effect on landing ground 
roll are clearly seen from Eq. (6.123). Specifically, Sg depends on wing loading, 
maximum lift coefficient, and (if used) the reverse thrust-to-weight ratio. From Eq. 
(6.123), we note that 
1. Sg increases with an increase in W / S. 
2. Sg decreases with an increase in (Cdmax· 
3. s g decreases with an increase in Trev/ W. 
4. sg increases with a decrease in Poo· 
Clearly, by comparing Eqs. (6.123) and (6.94), we see that W/S and (Cdmax play 
identical roles in determining both landing and takeoff ground rolls. However, the 
373 

===== PDF PAGE 387 =====
374 
Example 6.7 
P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
forward engine thrust-to-weight ratio is a major player during takeoff, whereas the 
engine thrust is in idle ( or in reverse) for the landing ground roll. 
Calculate the total landing distance for our Gulfstream-like airplane at standard sea level, 
assuming that (for conservatism) the landing weight is the samt, as the takeoff gross weight of 
73,000 lb. Assume that no thrust reversal is used and that the runway is dry concrete with a 
brakes-on value of /.Lr = 0.4. The approach angle is 3°. 
Solution 
Let us first calculate the stalling velocity for landing. From Table 5.3 for single-slotted Fowler 
flaps deflected in the landing position, we take (CL)max/ cos A = 2.7. With the wing sweep 
angle of A= 27°401, we have (Cdmax = 2.7 cos(27°40') = 2.39. From Eq. (5.67), 
Vstall = 
2 W 
Pco S (Cdmax 
2(76.84) 
(0.002377)(2.39) = 164·5 ft/s 
For a commercial airplane, the average flight velocity during the flare is 
VJ= l.23Vstall = 1.23(164.5) = 202.3 ft/s 
and the touchdown velocity is 
Vw = 1.15Vstall = 1.15(164.5) = 189.2 ft/s 
From Eq. (6.107) 
Vj (202.3)2 
R = - = = 6,354.9 ft 0.2g (0.2)(32.2) 
From Eq. (6.106) 
h J = R(l - cos Ba) = 6,354.9(1 - cos 3°) = 8.71 ft 
The approach distance is obtained from Eq. (6.108): 
50-hi 50-8.71 
Sa = --- = = 788 ft Tan Ba Tan 3° 
The flare distance is given by Eq. (6.109). 
SJ = R sin Ba = 6,354.9 sin 3° = 333 ft 
The ground roll is obtained from Eq. (6.119). In this equation, the values of Ir and JA 
are given by Eqs. (6.113) and (6.114), respectively. For Jr, we have 
Trev 
Jr = W + /.Lr = 0 + 0.4 = 0.4 
To calculate JA, we note from Example 6.6 that G = 0.588, k1 = 0.02, and CL = 0.1 for 
the ground roll. The··value of ACv,o =. 0.0177 calculated in Example 6.6 was for moderate 
flap deflection for takeoff. In contrast, for landing we assume full flap deflection. From the 
discussion in Section 6.7.1, Kuc in Eq. (6.76) can be taken as 3.16 x 10-5 for maximum flap 
deflection. In Example 6.6, the value used for Kuc was 4.5 x 10- 5 • Hence, from Eq. (6.76), 
the value of AC v,o calculated in Example 6.6 for takeoff should be reduced for landing by the 

===== PDF PAGE 388 =====
C H A P T E R 6 • Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
ratio 3.16 x 10-5 /4.5 x 10-5 = 0.702. Thus, recalling that !J.Cv,o = 0.0177 as calculated in 
Example 6.6, we have for the present case 
t:i.C D,0 = (0. 702)'(0.0177) = 0.0124 
Therefore, from Eq. (6.114), 
JA = 2(;/S) [ Cv,o + !J.Cv,o + (k1 + 1re~R) Cz - µ,CL J 
0.002377 { [ 0.588 J 2 } 
= 2(76_84) O.D15 + 0.0124 + 0.02 + rr(0.9)(5.92) (0.1) - (0.4)(0.1) 
= 1.547 X 10-5(0.0274 + 0.00055 - 0.04) = 1.864 X 10-7 
From Eq. (6.119), assuming that N = 3 s, 
Sg = NVro + - 1- In (1 + JA vio) 2gJA Jr 
1 [ -1.864 X 10-7 J = 3(189.2) + (2)(32_2)(-1. 864 x 10_7) In 1 + 0.4 (189.2) 
= 568 + 1,401 = 1,969 ft 
Finally, 
Totallandingdistance =s0 +s1 +sg=788+333+1,969=J 3,090ft I' 
6.9 SUMMARY 
This chapter has dealt with some special cases of accelerated airplane performance, 
that is, cases where the acceleration of the airplane is not zero. In some of these cases, 
the load factor n, defined as 
L n=-
W 
plays an important role. 
The tum radius and tum rate in a level tum are given, respectively, by 
and 
v2 
R = oo 
gJrt2 - 1 
g,./n 2 - 1 w= ---­Voo 
[6.5] 
[6.9] 
[6.11] 
For a sustained tum (one with constant flight characteristics), the load factor in Eqs. 
(6.9) and (6.11) is limited by the maximum available thrust-to-weight ratio. liftum, 
375 

===== PDF PAGE 389 =====
376 P A R T 2 • Airplane Performance 
for such a case, the minimum turn radius and maximum turning rate are functions of 
both wing loading and the thrust-to-weight ratio. 
For the pull-up and pulldown maneuvers, the turn radius and turn rate are given 
by, respectively, 
vz R = oo 
g(n ± 1) [(6.41 )/(6.45)] 
and 
g(n =i= 1) w=--- [(6.42)/(6.46)] 
Voo 
where the minus sign pertains to the pull-up maneuver and the plus sign pertains to 
the pulldown maneuver. 
In the limiting case for large load factor, these equations become the same for 
instantaneous level turn, pull-up, and pulldown maneuvers, namely, 
and 
vz R = ___!2£ 
gn [6.47] 
gn w = - [6.48] 
Voo 
There are various practical limitations on the maximum load factor that can be 
experienced or allowed; these are embodied in the V-n diagram for a given airplane. 
Accelerated climb performance can be analyzed by energy methods, where the 
total aircraft energy (potential plus kinetic) is given by the energy height 
. vz 
He = h + ___!2£ 
2g [6.56] 
A change in energy height can be accomplished by the application of specific excess 
power Pe; 
where Ps is given by 
dHe --=Ps dt 
excess power 
Ps=----W 
[6.65] 
[6.59] 
The takeoff distance is strongly dependent on W / S, T / W, and ( C dmax; it in­
creases with an increase in W /Sand decreases with increases in T /Wand (CL)max· 
The landing distance is dictated mainly by (CL)max and W / S; it decreases with an 
increase in ( C dmax and increases with an increase in W / S. The effect of thrust on 
landing distance appears in two ways: (1) Increased T / W decreases the approach 
angle, hence lengthening the landing distance; and (2) the use of reversed thrust after 
touchdown decreases the landing distance. 

===== PDF PAGE 390 =====
C H A P T E R 6 111 Airplane Performance: Accelerated Flight 
PROBLEMS 
For the BD-5J small, kit-built jet airplane described in Problem 5.1, calculate the 6.1 
minimum turning radius and maximum turn rate at sea level. 
For the conditions of maximum turn rate, derive the expressions for (a) the load factor, 6.2 
Eq. (6.35); (b) the velocity, Eq. (6.34); (c) the maximum tum rate, Eq. (6.36). 
Assume that the positive limit load factor for the BD-5J is 5. Calculate the comer 6.3 
velocity at sea level for the airplane. 
DeriveEq.(6.17). 6.4 
Consider an airplane flying at 620 rni/h at 35,000 ft Calculate its energy height. 6.5 
Consider an airplane in an accelerated climb. At a given instant in this climb, the 6.6 
specific excess power is 120 ft/s, the instantaneous velocity is 500 ft/s, and the in­
stantaneous rate of climb is 3,000 ft/min. Calculate the instantaneous acceleration. 
For the BD-5J (see Problem 5.1), calculate the total takeoff distance at sea level, 6.7 
assuming clearing a 35-ft obstacle. The height of the wing above the ground during 
the ground roll is 1.5 ft. Assume the runway is firm dirt with a coefficient of rolling 
friction of 0.04. 
For the BD-5J (see Problem 5.1), calculate the total landing distance, starting with the 6.8 
clearance of a 50-ft obstacle, assuming the landing weight is the same as the takeoff 
gross weight. The runway is firm dirt with a brakes-on coefficient of rolling friction 
of0.3. The approach angle is 4°. 

===== PDF PAGE 391 =====


===== PDF PAGE 392 =====
PAR,T 
3 
AIRPLANE DESIGN 
The capstone of most aeronautical research and development is a flying machine-an 
airplane, missile, space shuttle, etc. How does the existing technology in aerodynam­
ics, propulsion, and flight mechanics, as highlighted in Parts 1 and 2 of this book, 
lead to the design of a flying machine? This is the central question addressed in Part 
3. Here we will focus on the philosophy and general methodology of airplane design. 
After a general introduction to the design process, we will illustrate this process in 
separate chapters dealing with the design of a propeller-driven airplane, a subsonic 
high-speed jet-propelled airplane, and a supersonic airplane. We will further illustrate 
the design process with case histories of the design of several historically significant 
aircraft that revolutionized flight in the twentieth century. 
379 

===== PDF PAGE 393 =====
380 

===== PDF PAGE 394 =====
The Philosophy of Airplane Design 
The ... line of argument draws, or attempts to draw, a dear line between pure science 
and technology (which is tending to become a pejorative word). This is a line that 
once I tried to draw myself: but, though I can still see the reasons, I shouldn't now. 
The more I have seen of technologists at work, the more untenable the distinction 
has come to look. If you actually see someone design an aircraft, you can find him 
going through the same experience-aesthetic, intellectual, moral-as though he was 
setting up an experiment in particle physics." 
C. P. Snow, The Two Cultures: 
and a Second look, 1963, 
Cambridge University Press 
A beautiful aircraft is the expression of the genius of a great engineer who is also a 
great artist." 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Neville Shute, British aeronautical 
engineer a..11d novelist. From 
No Highway, 1947. 
Airplane design is both an a.rt and a science. In that respect it is difficult to learn by 
reading a book; rather, it must be experienced and practiced. However, we can offer 
the following definition and then attempt in this book to explain it Airplane design 
is the intellectual engineering process of creating on paper (or on a computer screen) 
a flying machine to (1) meet certain specifications and requirements established by 
potential users (or as perceived by the manufacturer) and/or (2) pioneer innovative, 
new ideas and technology. An exaxnple of the former is the design of most commerical 
:m 

===== PDF PAGE 395 =====
382 P A, R T 3 @ Airplane Design 
transports, starting at leas.t with the Douglas DC-1 in 1932, which was designed to 
meet or exceed various specifications by lli"l airline company. (The airline was TWA, 
named Transcontinental and Western Air at that time.) An example of the latter is 
the design of ti.'le rocket-powered Bell X-1, the first airplane to exceed the speed of 
sound in level or climbing flight (October 14, 1947). The design process is indeed 
an intellectual activity, but a rather special one that is tempered by good intuition 
developed via experience, by attention paid to successful airplane designs that have 
been used in the past, and by (generally proprietary) design procedures and databases 
(handbooks, etc.) that are a part of every airplane manufacturer. 
The remainder of this book focuses on the philosophy and general methodology 
of airplane design, that is, the intellectual activity. It is not intended to be a handbook, 
nor does it directly impart intuition, which is something that grows with experience. 
Rather, our intent is to provide some feeling and appreciation for the design experi­
ence. In this respect, this book is intended to serve as an intellectural steppingstone 
and natural companion to the several mainline airplane design texts presently avail­
able, such as Refs. 25, 35, and 52 to 54. These design texts are replete with detailed 
design procedures and data-all necessary for the successful design of an airplane. 
This book takes a more philosophical approach which is intended to provide an intel­
lectual framework on which the reader can hang all those details presented elsewhere 
and then stand back and see the broader picture of the airplane design process. This 
author hopes that by studying two ( or more) books-this book and one ( or more) of 
the detailed mainline design texts-the reader will enjoy a greatly enhanced learn­
ing process. To paraphrase a currently popular television commercial in the United 
States, the present book is not intended to make the course in airplane design; it is 
intended to make the course in airplane design better. 
7.2 PHASES OF AIRPLANE DESIGN 
From the time that an airplane first materializes as a new thought in the mind of one 
or more persons to the time that the finished product rolls out of the manufacturer's 
door, the complete design process has gone through three distinct phases that are 
carried out in sequence. These phases are, in chronological order, conceptual design, 
preliminary design, and detail design. They are characterized as follows. 
7.2. i Conceptual Design 
The design process starts with a set of specifications (requirements) for a new airplane, 
or much less frequently as the response to the desire to implement some pioneering, 
innovative new ideas and technology. In either case, there is a rather concrete goal 
toward which the designers are aiming. The first steps toward achieving that goal con­
stitute the conceptual design phase. Here, within a certain somewhat fuzzy 
the overall shape, size, weight, and performance of the new design are determined. 
The product of the conceptual design phase is a layout ( on paper or on a computer 

===== PDF PAGE 396 =====
C H A P T E R 7 @ The of 
screen) of the airplane configuration. But we have to visualize this drawing as one 
with flexible lines, capable of being changed during the second phase, 
the preliminary design phase. 
However, the conceptual design phase determines such 
fundamental aspects as the shape of the wings back, swept forward, or straight), 
the location of the wings relative to the fuselage, the shape and location of the hori­
zontal and vertical tail, the use of a canard surface or not, engine size and placement, 
etc. Figure 7 .1 is an example of the level of detail in a configuration layout at the end 
of the conceptual design phase. (Shown in Fig. 7 .1 is the World War II vintage Bell 
P-39 Airacobra, chosen for its historical significance and aesthetic beauty.) 
The major drivers during the conceptual design process are aerodynamics, propul­
sion, and flight performance. The first-order question is: Can the design meet the 
specifications? If the answer is yes, then the next question is: Is the design opti­
wized, that is, is it the best design that meets the specifications? These questions 
are answered during the conceptual design by using tools primarily from aero­
dynamics, propulsion, and flight performance (e.g., material from Chapters 2, 3, 5, 
and 6). Structural and control system considerations are not dealt with in any de­
tail. However, they are not totally absent. For during the conceptual design 
phase, the designer is influenced by such qualitative aspects as the increased structural 
loads imposed by a high horizontal T-tail versus a more conventional horizontal tail 
location through 
the fuselage, and the difficulties associated with cutouts in the wing 
structure if the landing gear are to retract into the wing rather than the fuselage or 
engine nacelle. No part of the design process is ever carried out in a total vacuum 
unrelated to the other parts. 
7.2.2 Preliminary Design 
In the preliminary design phase, only minor changes are made to the configuration 
layout (indeed, if major changes were demanded during this phase, the conceptual 
design process would have been seriously flawed to begin with). It is in the preliminary 
design phase that serious structural and control system analysis and design take place. 
During this phase also, substantial wind tunnel testing will be carried out, and major 
computational fluid dynamic (CFD) calculations of the complete flow field over the 
airplane configuration will be made. It is possible that the wind tunnel tests and/or 
the CFD calculations will uncover s9me undesirable aerodynamic interference, or 
some unexpected stability problems, ;1hich will promote changes to the configuration 
layout. At the end of the preliminary design phase, the airplane configuration is 
frozen and precisely defined. The drawing process called lofting is carried out which 
mathematically models the precise shape of the outside skin of the airplane, making 
certain that an sections of the aircraft properly fit together. (Lofting is a term carried 
over to airplane design from design. designed the shape 
of the hull in the loft, an area located above the 
The end of the design 
or not The 
for modem aircraft manufacturers cannot be ,rn,,,.,..~,"t"'r1 
dous costs involved in the 
383 

===== PDF PAGE 397 =====
• 
-n 
cc· 
C 
iii 
:'I 
-
?l? &_[ a (1) 
.:._. a_ 
n'C oa =:. C: 
~-~ 
~; 
(1) 
c:, 
~ .,, w 
-0 
~ 
a 
&-a 
w Q.., 
: [ 
a_ 
~ = 0 
~ 
!;) 
C: ... 
~ 
~ 
0 ..,., 
t g· 
if 
f 
l? ,5· 
GENEIIAL SPECIFICATIONS 
WEIGHT EMPTY 06'45 L,,. 
WEIGHT GROSS 7700 " 
WEIGHT MAX. (OYEIILOADJ HOO '" 
TOP SPEED, Iii 11,000 FT. 385 mpll 
LANDINI SPEED H " 
!!ANGE (MILITAIIY CONDITIONJ HO mlloo 
RANIIE (FEIIRY CRUISE J l,ZSO • 
ABSOLUTE CEILING 35,000 It. 
CIIITICAL ALTITUDE ,e,ooo • 
WINO AREA 21!.22 oq.11. 
ENGINE, ALLBON Y•ITIO•II 
TAKE OFF POWEii 1200 H.P. 
SEA LEVEL (NORMAL) 1017 H.P • 
AT :SOOOrpm 
9000 n. EMEIIGENCY 1418 H.11! 
AIRFOIL 6 WING CONSTRUCTION SAME ON ALL 
PRODUCTION P-39 TYPES 
W•Z 
I 
ALL TRIM TABS, 10• MINUS & PLUS MOVEMENT 
·~r~~r~ jo'Oia'0 O JR 
--.-----i 7 
27•:_.j 
1--·--·--· -· 
4•3:5' INSIGNIA 
~
HITE OAllk 
I BLUE 
I 
WING, PYLON MOUfr,tTEO 
M·2 .,o CAL. 270 ROUNDS 
[Drnr!.~ 
-·-· -·-·--i 
(NORMALJ 
'!Tmnt NOSE 
CANNON 
( 50 SHELL CAPJ 

===== PDF PAGE 398 =====
(concluded) 
' <> -.. .. 
385 
., ... g -... 
"'Q" ofO 
f o' 0 a;!"" 
~o~ = 
" 
·-·--'1 

===== PDF PAGE 399 =====
386 
"Fuzzy" configuration 
definition ~ 
P A R T 3 ~ Airplane 
illustrated than with the Boeing Airplane Company's decision in 1966 to proceed 
with the manufacture of the 747 wide-body transport (Fig. 1.34) after the preliminary 
design was finished. As noted in Section 1.2.4, the failure of the 747 would have 
financially ruined Boeing. H is no longer unusual for such decisions in the aircraft 
industry to be one of bet your company" on the full-scale development of a new 
airplane. 
7.2.3 Detail Design 
The detail design phase is literally the "nuts and bolts" phase of airplane design. The 
aerodynamic, propulsion, structures, performance, and flight control analyses have 
all been finished with the preliminary design phase. For detail design, the airplane 
is now simply a machine to be fabricated. The precise design of each individual 
rib, spar, and section of skin now truces place. The size, number, and location of 
fasteners (rivets, welded joints, etc.) are determined. Manufacturing tools and jigs 
are designed. At this stage, flight simulators for the airplane are developed. And 
these are just a few of the many detailed requirements during the detail design phase. 
At the end of this phase, the aircraft is ready to be fabricated. 
7.2.4 Interim Summary 
Figure 7.2 is a schematic intended, in a very simple manner, to visually illustrate the 
distinction between the products of t!-ie three phases of airplane design. The product 
of conceptual design is represented in Fig. 7.2a. Here, the basic configuration of 
the airplane is determined, but only within a certain (hopefully small) fuzzy latitude. 
The product of preliminary design is represented in Fig. 7.2b. Here, the precise 
configuration (precise dimensions) is determined. Finally, the product of detail design 
is represented in Fig. 7.2c. Here, the precise fabrication details are determined, 
represented by the precise rivet sizes and locations. 
When students first study the subject of airplane design, it is the conceptual design 
phase that is treated. For example, the mainline design texts (Refs. 25, 35, and 52 
to 54) are essentially conceptual design texts. The subjects of preliminary and detail 
---( 
Precise configuration 
definition '----... 
Rivet size and (\ 
locatio~j L 
----\ 
(.__ ii ,---) 
\ 
6 c~ 
(a) Product of conceptual design (b) Product of preliminary design (c) Product of detail design 
Figura 7.2 Schematic 

===== PDF PAGE 400 =====
C H A P T E R 7 • The Philosophy of Airplane Design 
design are much too extensive and specialized for a first study of airplane design. 
This book is no different in that respect; we will limit our discussions to aspects of 
conceptual design as defined in Section 7 .2.1. 
7.3 THE SEVEN INTELLECTUAL PIVOT POINTS 
FOR CONCEPTUAL DESIGN 
The design process is an act of creativity, and like all creative endeavors, there is no one 
correct and absolute method to carry it out. Different people, different companies, 
different books all approach the subject from different angles and with a different 
sequence of events. However, this author suggests that, on a philosophical basis, 
the overall conceptual design proces.s is anchored by seven intellectual (let us say) 
"pivot points"-seven aspects that anchor the conceptual design thought process, but 
which allow different, more detailed thinking to reach out in all directions from each 
(hypothetical) pivot point. H'.ence, conceptual design can be imagined as an array 
of the seven pivot points anchored at strategic locations in some kind of intellectual 
space, and these pivot points are connected by a vast web of detaj.led approaches. The 
webs constructed by different people would be different, although the pivot points 
should be the same, due to their fundamental significance. These seven pivot points 
are liste:! in the block array shown in Fig. 7 .3 and are described and discussed below. 
The Seven Intellectual Pivot Points for Conceptual Design 
11. Requirements j 
j 2. Weight of the airplane-first estimate I 
3. Critical performance parameters 
a. Maximum lift coefficient (CL)max 
b. Lift-to-drag ratio LID 
c. Wing loading WIS 
d. Thrust-tosweight ratio TIW 
4. Configuration layout-shape and size of the 
airplane on a drawing (or computer screen) 
15. Better weight estimate j 
L-.,.N,_0---1 6. Performance analysis-does the design 
meet or exceed requirements? 
Figure 7.3 
Yes 
7. Optimization-is it the best design? 
The seven intellectual pivot points for 
conceptual design. 
387 

===== PDF PAGE 401 =====
388 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Fixing these pivot points in your mind will serve to create ~n intellectual framework 
on which you can hang all the details of conceptual design, no matter how different 
these details may be from one design group to another. 
Let us now consider in turn each of the seven intellectual pivot points listed in 
Fig. 7.3. 
7.3.1 Requirements 
Imagine that you are now ready to begin the design of a new airplane. Where and how 
do you start? With a clear statement of the requirements to be satisfied by the new 
airplane. The requirements may be written by the people who are going to buy the new 
airplane-the customer. For military aircraft, the customer is the government. For 
civilian transports, the customer is the airlines. On the other hand, for general aviation 
aircraft-from executive jet transports owned by private businesses (and some wealthy 
individuals) to small, single-engine recreation airplanes owned by individual private 
pilots-the requirements are usually set by the manufacturer in full appreciation of 
the needs of the private airplane owner. [An excellent historical example was the 
design of the famous Ercoupe by Engineering and Research Corporation (ERCO) in 
the late 1930s, where in the words of Fred Weick, its chief designer, the company 
s,et as its overall goal the design of an airplane "that would be unusually simple and 
easy to fly and free from the difficulties associated with stalling and spinning." The 
Ercoupe is shown in Fig. 7.4.] If the general aviation aircraft manufacturer has done 
its homework correctly, the product will be bought by the private airplane owner. 
~ ~ ~ 
~~ 
Figure 7.4 The ERCO Ercoupe, circa 1940. 

===== PDF PAGE 402 =====
C H A P T E R 7 ~ The Philosophy of Airplane Design 
Requirements for a new airplane design are as unique and different from one 
airplane to another as fingerprints are from one human being to another. Hence, we 
cannot stipulate in this section a specific, standard form to use to write requirements­
there is none. All we can say is that for any new airplane design, there must be some 
established requirements which serve as the jumping-off point for the design process, 
and which serve as the focused goal for the completed design. Typical aspects that 
are frequently stipulated in the requirements are some combination of the following: 
1. Range. 
2. Takeoff distance. 
3. Stalling velocity. 
4. Endurance [usually important for reconnaissance airplanes; an overall 
dominating factor for the new group of very high-altitude uninhabited air 
vehicles (UAVs) that are of great interest at present]. 
5. Maximum velocity. 
6. Rate of climb. 
7. For dogfighting combat aircraft, maximum turn rate and sometimes minimum 
turn radius. 
8. Maximum load factor. 
9. Service ceiling. 
10. Cost. 
11. Reliability and maintainability. 
12. Maximum size (so that the airplane will fit inside standard hangers and/or be 
able to fit in a standard gate at airline terminals). 
These are just a few examples, to give you an idea as to what constitutes "require­
ments." Today, the design requirements also include a host of details associated with 
both the interior and exterior mechanical aspects of the airplane. An interesting com­
parison is between the one page of U.S. Army Signal Corps requirements (reproduced 
in Fig. 7 .5) set forth on January 20, 1908 for the first army airplane, and the thick, 
detailed general design document that the government usually produces today for 
establishing the requirements for new military aircraft. (The requirements shown in 
Fig. 7.5 were satisfied by the Wright brothers' type A airplane. This airplane was 
purchased by the Army, and became known as the Wright Military Flyer.) 
7.3.2 Weight of the Airplane-First Estimate 
No airplane can get off the ground unless it can produce a lift greater than its weight. 
And no airplane design process can "get off the ground" without a first estimate 
of the gross takeoff weight. The fact that a weight estimate, albeit crude, is the 
next pivot point after the requirements is also satisfying from an historical point 
of view. Starting with George Cayley in 1799, the efforts to design a successful 
389 

===== PDF PAGE 403 =====
Figure 7.5 
~.., ,i,_: .. ~ ,, 
lf.4j~ : ·1, 
"ft;~ (J •.• ?,.e,. 
.SIONAL CORP! .SPl!CIPICATION. NO. 416. ~ ·,:, • 
dYUTIIIIIIIUT AlfD IPIICIPIC.&TIO• POii .& D.&.,.._ff.&Jl • .t.18 PLTIIIO IIACIIJR 
TDIB PVIUC: 
._... ,..,....., i• 4•pl5-la. will M ...., .... , l IMI ...... 111 lie• .. NN • r._,,. l, 
1-• .... , el U.. ~ et o..1 ........ hftl ...... t.r ,. ................ 0.,. 1Pllli • 
._._. ..... !Mr l,t .. ..-1 ... A.U ,...,....__. ... will .. 111 ..... .._. te-dae ..... el 0.U... 
..... lftwll .... lNI .. II• ll'llt ...Uq .,_ _,...,,. 1 rw I .. .a.lcl ..... . 
......... wi911i.al( M Hll•lt p,vpctMh •N« tMI aplllOilMll.,. ..._ MM!,• 1..-.-·......., fot1M _. 
......... by apphNh .... - Ct.iel' ...... oa .... cr.1--. ..... Arm,, .. .,. n.,.n ... , ............... . 
D. C. TM u., ... lw1• ........ 11 .. nsti1 lo rQNI •f M4 .a1 ,..,_.111. u .... the .... ,. ................. , .... ,.,.., .... IJiq ...... , .. *' ·-..... - .... ... 
p1- ol the •• 11 •. 
p,.,.,.,,.,.,., -".fhNI •peeilC*fiOII ., ............. ....alAI ol • lfi•I ...... , .. •pportecl •dNlJ -
U.dJ ... MI ,...._ ot tile.: ....... Md Mri81 ......... . 
Atwp,Mfttt -n. ll11•s ._, .. '&"tH N ...,_. •IJ llft• .,......, .. trW 1 .... t. ...... •II ... 
l& will eio.plJ •ilh all NII•',. ... '--, PIie ............ Jf• ,.,. ..... • _ .. , •Ill ...... ••di 
.,.... tM UW lip« uJ MNfMAn•· 
lruJl'fflOfll.-TM Oot'en ... , ,_...,..&IN,...,•...,._ Ml ... .U ........ ., .... , .... ,._ 
a ........ ~ 
Ttr.e reoerat dilNnslOD• ot tlM 1,1 .. ...,., .. wi.11 be deleralHd "1 tN .... r..u.r ... IIIJNI. • 
UN,follo•l11« "'*d1UOM; 
1. lkclden •• ,., ••bait •IUI Uteir,........ , .. t.U..1.,: 
t•) 0..-i•P IO_.. ._1., dNi....,.S .. ___... .......... ot IN ~ ............ .... 
.. , ,...,.. .... , .. ...., , ............. . 1•>-· ................. ""--· CeJ ._ ..... , et 11M toW .. ,,_.,. ti tlla •n-t1•1 ,.__. 
(4} ......... tflll ............... 
(r) °'"9eriptloll of U..-stM wtr.W. "'111 ..... fw ...... ~· 
(/J 11M -..t•rial ot •ltld tH , ..... p1-. Md ,,..,.i .... 1rUI IN eoMtnNt.S. Plau ..... _. 
•Ill nol ba ..... lo ...... WcWa ... 
I. 11 .. clNirable , .... tlN lri•1 _..1 .. MOIIW bt ..... Id. eo lhM ti •-, be qalaklJ ........ ., 
-1,lad °""' 1611• a,-rt MCI ,-oll:ed f., traa,iport91:ioll la at•t .,..,.., It .._kl be ...... et 
w .. -•••• .ml pat I• .,.u .. eoNll.toll la.-.,._ hHt. 
:1. TIM 1,1., IUCltl•• •• .. ._.,.... to .,,, , .. Pffl'OU .... ~ .. • .. wud ..... , ol .._, 
uoPN ... .._"._.,,..aw.1111111et 1ua1-. 
,. "l'M triac .... 1 .. .,..hi • ._.... 1e Mw • .,.... ., • ..... ,_., .... ,... Nll,ta te111 
.ar, NI IM&IM•• .. tt.k, ....... la u.tr,......,. ,., .. .,...,.,.,.. ._.,..ettalNd 
............. tipt, ............... , ............. : 
6U ..... ,-, .... ,. 100,... _,. 
II •II•,......,,'°,., ... , . 
................... -1,. 
1'.1 ... ,., ... ,,70 .... -, . 
. . ,.,... .... ,, .,,... ..... 
1.-. tllM N al ... per Nilr ..,...... 
ti .1 ... ,- .... ,. 110,... ..... 
...... ,.., .... ,,110,... ..... 
61 •I• Pl'• ..._,., 1IO ,- ...._ 
... u .. ,... ... , ...... ..... 
.. TIit ......... , ............. th l.rW .... , .SIi ............. .., talliti ... ,.,.. " ... 
..... ..... • .......... ...... ., ............ ,-. ............... - •IN. fte .... •Ill ... &lkN 
..,.,.,. ...... "' S--111 tfw-..rtl•,,.. ..... ,.11 ....... ~ ... ., ......... ftla ... •'IN* 
le .... IIMldlU..al dtlAIII • tha Clt,W ..... O._, of tltt .,., .. , ...-,tbt a& - u ... 
I • .,.... MWpl,IIIN • 1rlal ftd•l'NI• llpl•lll' be ,..aired ol al~ .. "°9t ............ ti .. 
Iha lrlnr ...a.la• •Ht l"MUI• .. u • ....a, I• tlle air 9'11M•I la.,1.,. II lhall Nltlta • IN 1111P1&a1 
po,1111 and IMMl •ilMllt .. , U..,. llr.M .. .w ....... tc 1 .... ....., llarll•I ........... llpL 
D•rt., thla trW 11,t1.1ot ooe Nllr It•• ....... I• all llll'NllMI _.tllNt-dl ... ltJ' u111 a&lll 11•• 
uda, ,.,,.. ........... aifi•lllbrl••· 
,. n ... 1.w. ~Ul i. .n .... ~ ~ • pNwtW tor•• ,.,.....,.. , ... 1. ,.. ... tr1a11 ,., 
.... ,.... • preyldld fer I• ........... I, Md 11et• .... •• lllt ... ,... .. wllhla a ....... fl t•ll'tf 
_,. , ... u.. .a.a. o1 .... .,.,.,. n. u,.... et tltt _.. .. 11ia.,.. br ,aw .... ,-.... ,... ,-. 
el .i.11-.rJ I• U.. Gower•-• ... \Ital ilpla 1tlll Ila .. hit .,.,, Vl'l'lala. 
I. lt IIIIMIY ba eo daslp .. M lo ...... I• HI --•t'7 wllWI -, 1111 ............. la hid ........... 
Tito RArtln1 dui• ·-bli ..... ·" lrMllpo,lllb&a. It ........ .,_ ...... a lald •IIIIMt ,.. .. n., 
• lpMIIIU1 ,,.,.,.a •pol •ad 1rlU.0.1 tla. ... ltl' II• mll"Nl•N. 
I, II .... kl ba "'°•Wed •II• ... 4o•leo IO ,-,.Itel • -,. 4-ut I• - el •• ..W..\ .. IM 
JNOP1llln1 ..,.., .. ,,.. 
10. 1, ohookl bli ... ,. ••• , ... pla ..... 00ttltt1111M>II •IMS. .......... 10 ,-,.1& u ............ • 
._. pNlleieflt I• , .. •• wlllt.la a ,......a,a. i.n,rtlt ot d ... 
11. B.kW•ni .... ,,Miah .. hi""" &hat Uta au .. "' ... ' ot , ... U•lted .......... I.hi la•r.1 ,,_., ,. 
- all ,-~arad lhvlC"N .,. •PP•rt••._. •lllk-11 ..,. ba a par& ol th lrt•• ..... 19' .. d r~ tM 
.... , .... ,.,. of Illa 1,1., •Mhl••.,. ut11or1..i lo_.,.,, ....... 10 Ille Go'l'l'n••L .,.. .. ..., ... 
IO Illa •11N11&ricll4d ript lo ... IM IJI ........ ..W le U.. Qo.,.,. .... , "'' dCMa U -te.plue t .. 
.... _._..,...._of ,-teftt rtp.a. fot d•pUmu-, it.. 1,1 .......... . 
11. Bhhhn wlll ba .... ,,.. '° l•l'IIIW. •lilt tllelt ,..,.... a a.11W ..._. •-•U•I .. IM 
,-... t ol .... priN ltAIIMI lot 1N to-•I• ...... Upoa a.Ill .. Illa ...... I• .... IJl•I .... , .. 
..._awt,w .... 11 •• 1111111 Nlllraed .. u...,...,., .. .._....., .. ..._.1u ._,...,,.. .. , .... _. 
• ...... MDONI., t.o A,.J lleslllalloM, at IN ..... at 1111u1 .. thll ,.._ ...... fw 11111 to-•lla .... . 
11. Tllo ............. ,,.,..... ........................... tlllail........_., ........ .. 
Mll41U11 MN1 -,.,.Uoli., ..... ,,.. ....... .. ............. ler tW. ......... WIil Ill ..... . 
16. ....,. ......... Uleu .. nWi w111111 ,... .. fN ,., .. u..,,aner...ap&., ... . 
, .... AU.JIii, 
...... - Clwf ....... .,,....., ... _ .. __ 
-... -w ..-rllOl'N, D. C., o.r..-, •• *'· 
Facsimile of the first published mission requirement for a military 
aircraft, January 20, 1908. This request led to the purchase of the 
Wright brothers' military type A Flyer later that year for the U.S. 
Army. 
390 

===== PDF PAGE 404 =====
C H A P T E R 7 • The Philosophy of Airplane Design 
heavier-than-air flying machine in the nineteenth century were dominated by two 
questions: (1) Can enough aerodynamic lift be produced in a practical manner to 
exceed the weight? (2) If so, ·can it be done without producing so much drag that the 
power plant required to produce the opposing thrust would be impractically large and 
heavy? In particular, Lilienthal, Langley, and the Wright brothers were acutely aware 
of the importance of weight; they knew that more weight meant more drag, which 
dictated an engine with more power, which meant even more weight. In the conceptual 
design of an airplane, we cannot go any further until we have a first estimate of the 
takeoff gross weight. 
7.3.3 Critical Performance Parameters 
The design requirements stipulate the required performance of the new airplane. In 
Chapters 5 and 6, we found out that airplane performance is critically dependent 
on several parameters, especially (1) maximum lift coefficient (Cdmax; (2) lift-to­
drag ratio L/ D, usually at cruise; (3) wing loading W / S; and (4) thrust-to-weight 
ratio T / W. We saw in particular how W / S and T / W appeared in many governing 
equations for airplane performance. Therefore, the next pivot point is the calculation 
of first estimates for W / S and T / W that are necessary to achieve the performance 
as stipulated by the requirements. In the subsequent chapters, we will see how these 
first estimates can be made: 
7.3.4 Configuration Layout 
The configuration layout is a drawing of the shape and size (dimensions) of the airplane 
as it has evolved to this stage. The critical performance parameters (Section 7.3.3) in 
combination with the initial weight estimate (Section 7.3.2) give enough information 
to approximately size the airplane and to draw the configuration. 
7.3.5 Better Weight Estimate 
By this stage, the overall size and shape of the airplane are coming more into focus. 
Because of the dominant role played by weight, the pivot point at this stage is an 
improved estimate of weight, based upon the performance parameters determined in 
Section 7.3.3, a detailed component weight breakdown based on the configuration 
layout in Section 7 .3.4, and a more detailed estimate of the fuel weight necessary to 
meet the requirements. 
7.3.6 Performance Analysis 
At this pivot point, the airplane as drawn in Section 7.3.4 is put through a preliminary 
performance analysis using the t'echniques ( or the equivalent) discussed in Chapters 5 
and 6. This pivot point is where "the rubber meets the road"-where the configuration 
391 

===== PDF PAGE 405 =====
392 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
drawn in Section 7 .3 .4 is judged as to whether it can meet all the original specifications 
set forth in Section 7.3.1. This is obviously a critical point in the conceptual design 
process. It is unlikely that the configuration, as first obtained, will indeed meet all 
the specifications; it may exceed some, but not measure up to others. At this stage, 
the creative judgment of the designer is particularly important. An iterative process 
is initiated wherein the configuration is modified, with the expectation of coming 
closer to meeting the requirements. The design process returns to step 3 in Fig. 
7.3 and readjusts the critical performance parameters in directions that will improve 
performance. These readjustments in turn readjust the configuration in step 4 and 
the better weight estimate in step 5. The new (hopefully improved) performance is 
assessed in step 6. The iteration is repeated until the resulting airplane design meets 
the requirements. 
At this stage, some mature judgment on the part of the design team is critical, 
because the iterative process might not lead to a design that meets all the requirements. 
This may be because some of the specifications are unrealistic, or that the existing 
technology is not sufficiently advanced, or that costs are estimated to be prohibitive, 
or for a host of other reasons. As a result, in collaboration with the customer, some 
specifications may be relaxed in order to achieve other requirements that take higher 
priority. For example, if high speed is critical, but the high wing loading that al­
lows this high speed increases the takeoff and landing distances beyond the original 
specifications, then the takeoff and landing requirements might be relaxed. 
7.3.7 Optimization 
When the design team is satisfied that the iterative process between steps 3 and 6 in 
Fig. 7.3 has produced a viable airplane, the next question is: Is it the best design? 
This leads to an optimization analysis, which is the seventh and final pivot point listed 
in Fig. 7.3. The optimization may be carried out by a systematic variation of different 
parameters, such as T /Wand W / S, producing a large number of different airplanes 
via steps 3 to 6, and plotting the performance of all these airplanes on graphs whiqi 
provide a sizing matrix or a carpet plot from which the optimum design can be found: 
In recent years, the general field of optimization has grown into a discipline of its 
own. Research in optimization theory had led to more mathematical sophistication 
which is finding its way into the design process. It is likely that airplane designers in 
the early twenty-first century will have available to them optimized design programs 
which may revolutionize the overall design process. 
7.3.8 Constraint Diagram 
Some of the intellectual activity described in Sections 7.3.6 and 7.3.7 can be aided by 
constructing a constraint diagram, which identifies the allowable solution space for 
the airplane design, subject to various constraints imposed by the initial requirements 
and the laws of physics. We have seen that the thrust-to-weight ratio and wing loading 
are two of the most important design parameters. A constraint diagram consists of 

===== PDF PAGE 406 =====
C H A P T E R 7 o11 The Philosophy of Airplane Design 
plots of the sea-level thrust-to-takeoff weight ratio T0 / Wo versus the wing loading at 
takeoff W0 / S that are determined by various requirements set up in our intellectual 
pivot point 1. A schematic of a constraint diagram is shown in Fig. 7.6, where 
the curves labeled A, B, and C pertain to constraints imposed by different specific 
requirements. Let us examine each curve in turn. 
Curve A: Takeoff Constraint If the requirements specify a maximum takeoff length, 
then curve A gives the allowed variation of To/ Wo versus Wo/ S for which this re­
quirement is exactly satisfied. For example, for simplicity, let us approximate the 
takeoff distance by the expression for the ground roll given by Eq. (6.95), repeated 
here: 
l.2l(W/S) 
Sg=-------
gpoo(Cdmax(T /W) 
[6.95] 
In Eq. (6.95), s8 is a given number. Solving Eq. (6.95) for T / W, we have 
[7.1] 
Noting that the factor in brackets is a constant and applying Eq. (7 .1) to takeoff 
conditions at sea level, we have 
C 
Figure 7.6 
Solution space 
Design poin) 
-I' 
B 
A schematic of a conslraint diagram. 
A 
393 

===== PDF PAGE 407 =====
394 P A R T 3 e Airpla,,e Design 
To - = constant x -
Wo S 
For the takeoff constraint, To/ is a linear function of W0 / S; this is given by curve 
A in Fig. 7 .6. Important: Any value of To/ W0 above this curve wm satisfy the takeoff 
constraint resulting in a takeoff distance smaller than the required value. So the 
area above curve A. is "allowable" from the point of view of the takeoff constraint 
Curv~ B: Consi'raint If the requirements specify a maximum landing length, 
then curve B represents this constraint. Equation (6.123) gives the landing ground 
roll. Let us represent the landing distance Eq. 123), repeated here: 
. 
2 W 1 . j2(W IS) 
Sg = J N - -S (C ) -t- (C ) rr. /D W (l u,)1 Poo L max gpoo L max<-rev + + µ, - vr J 
[6. 123] 
For a given value of s 3 , there is only one value of W / S that satisfies this equation. 
Hence, the landing constraint is represented by a vertical line through this particular 
value of W / S. This is shown by curve Bin Fig. 7.6. Values of W0 / S to the left of 
this vertical line will satisfy the constraint by resulting in a landing distance smaller 
than the required value. So the area to the left of curve B is "allowable" from the 
point of view of the landing constraint. 
Curve C: Susmined level Tum If the requirements specify a sustained level turn with a 
given load factor at a given altitude and speed, then curve C represents this constraint. 
Equation ( 6.18), repeated here. relates load factor, T / and W / S for a sustained 
level tum. 
lip00 V~[(T) 1 2 Co.oJll/
2 
nmax = . K (W / S) \ W max - 2 Poo V oo W / S [6.11] 
For the given constraint, an quantities in Eq. ( 6.18) axe given except the two variables 
T/ Wand W / S. Solving Eq. (6.18) for T / W, we can write 
To W C2 - = c,- +-- [7.31 
Wo S W/S 
where C1 and C2 are constants. Equation (7.3) is represented curve C in Fig. 7.6. 
Values of To/ W0 above curve C will satisfy the sustained tum requirements. The 
area above curve C is "allowable" from the point of view of the sustained 
requirement 
Assuming curves A, B, and C represent the constraints, the area in Fig. 7 .6 
that is common to the three allowable areas is the shaded area identified as the solution 
space. An airplane with any combination of T0 / Wo and W0 / S that falls within this 
solution space will satisfy the constraints imposed the requirements. 
constructing the constraint diagram as shown in the airplane ""'"'"'fr"""' 
can intelligently decide where to start the preliminary design, hence avoiding some 

===== PDF PAGE 408 =====
C H A P T E R 7 ® The Philosophy of Airpiane Design 
trial designs that later prove not to satisfy one or more of the requirements. Looking 
at the constraint diagram, the designer can choose to start at a selected design point, 
indentified by the cross in Fig. 7.6. It makes sense to pick a design point with a 
relatively low T0 / but which is stiil in the solution space, so that the aircraft 
design is not unduly overpowered, hence costing more than necessary. 
7.3.9 Interim Summary 
Figure 7.3 illustrates the seven intellectual pivot points in the conceptual design of an 
airplane. To actually carry out the conceptual design process, we must visualize these 
seven pivot points interconnected by a web of detailed considerations. For 
we must 
1. Make a selection of the airfoil section. 
2. Determine the wing geometry (aspect ratio, sweep angle, taper ratio, twist, 
incidence angle relative to the fuselage, dihedral, vertical location on the 
fuselage, wing-tip shape, etc.) 
3. Choose the geometry and arrangement of the tail. Would a"canard be more 
usefd? 
4. Decide what specific power plants are to be used. What are the size, number, 
and placement of the engines? 
5. Decide what high-lift devices will be necessary. 
These are just a few elements of the web of details that surrounds and interconnects the 
seven pivot points listed in Fig. 7 .3. Moreover, there is nothing unique about this web 
of details; each designer or design team spins this web as suits their purposes. The 
next two chapters spin some simple webs that are illustrative of the design process 
for a propeller-driven airplane, a jet-propelled subsonic airplane, and a supersonic 
airplane, respectively. They are intended to be illustrative only; the reader should not 
attempt to actually construct and fly a flying machine from the designs presented in 
subsequent chapters. Recall that our purpose in this book is to give insight into the 
design philosophy. It is intended to be studied as a precursor and as a companion to 
the more detailed design texts exemplified by Refs. 25 and 52 to 54. 
So, let us get on with spinning these webs. 
395 

===== PDF PAGE 409 =====


===== PDF PAGE 410 =====
chapf'er 
8 
Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
There is nothing revolutionary in the airplane business. It is just a matter of develop­
ment. What we've got today is the Wright brothers' airplane developed and refined. 
But the basic principles are just what they always were. 
Donald W. Douglas, July 1, 1936. 
Comment made at the presentation of 
the Collier Trophy to Douglas for the 
design of the DC-3. President 
Roosevelt presented the award to 
Douglas at the White House. 
When you design it ... think about how you would feel if you had to fly it! Safety 
first! 
8. 1 INTRODUCTION 
Sign on the wall of the design office at 
Douglas Aircraft Company, 1932. 
The purpose of this chapter is to illustrate the process and philosophy of the design 
of a subsonic propeller-driven airplane. In a sense, this chapter (and the subsequent 
chapter) is just one large "worked example." We will use the seven pivot points 
described in Chapter 7 to anchor our thinking, and we will draw from Chapters 1 to 
6 to construct our web of details around these pivot points. 
397 

===== PDF PAGE 411 =====
PART 3 @ 
8.2 
We are given the job of designing a business transport aircraft which will carry 
five passengers plus the pilot in relative comfort in a cabin. The "V·"-·H""" 
performance is to be as follows: 
1. Maximum level speed at midcrnise 
2. Range: 1,200 mi. 
3. Ceiling: 25,000 ft. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Rate of climb at sea level: 
Stalling 70 mi/h. 
Landing distance 
7. Takeoff distance 
ft/min. 
In addition, the airplane should be ""'"""""'" 
eating engine. 
one (or conventional recipro-
The stipulation of these ""11"'"'""''"'"''~ constitutes an ~'""HJJW of the first 
point in Fig. 7.3. 
8.3 THE WEIGHT 
ESTIMATE 
AN AIRPLANE 
As noted in Fig. 7.3, the second pivot in our design is the 
preliminary ( almost crude) estimation of the gross weight of the airplane. Let us take 
this opportunity to discuss the nature of the weight of an airplane in detail. 
There are various ways to subdivide and categorize the of an 
airplane. The following is a common choice. 
1. Crew weight Wcrew· The crew comprises the people necessary to operate the 
airplane in flight. For our airplane, the crew is the 
2. Payload weight Wpayload· The payload is what the airplane is intended to 
transport-passengers, baggage, freight, etc. If the is intended for 
military combat use, the payload includes rockets, and other disposable 
ordnance. 
3. Fuel weight Wfuel. This is the weight of the fuel in the fuel tanks. Since fuel is 
consumed during the course of the is a decreasing with 
time during the flight. 
4. Empty weight Wempty· This is the weight of everything else-the structure, 
engines (with all accessory equipment), electronic (including radar, 
computers, communication devices, etc.), landing gear, fixed"'"'''"'"''"'·"'' 
galleys, etc.), and anything else that is not crew, payload, or fuel. 

===== PDF PAGE 412 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
The sum of these weights is the total weight of the airplane W. Again, W varies 
throughout the flight because fuel is being consumed, and for a military combat 
airplane, ordnance may be dropped or expended, leading to a decrease in the payload 
weight. · 
The design takeoff gross weight W0 is the weight of the airplane at the instant it 
begins its mission. It includes the weight of all the fuel on board at the beginning of 
the flight. Hence, 
Wo = Wcrew + Wpayload + Wfuel + Wempty [8.1] 
In Eq. (8.1 ), WrueI is the weight of the full fuel load at the beginning of the flight. 
In Eq. (8.1), W0 is the important quantity for which we want a first estimate; W0 
is the desired result from pivot point 2 in Fig. 7.3. To help make this estimate, Eq. 
(8.1) can be rearranged as follows. If we denote Wfuel by Wt and Wempty by We (for 
notational simplicity), Eq. (8.1) can be written as 
Wo = Wcrew + Wpayload + Wt + We . [8.2] 
or 
Wt We Wo = Wcrew + Wpayload + - Wo + -Wo Wo Wo [8.3] 
Solving Eq. (8.3) for W0 , we have 
Wo = Wcrew + Wpayload 
1 - WtfWo - We/Wo 
[8.4] 
The fom1 of Eq. (8.4) is particularly useful. Although at this stage we do not have a · 
value of Wo, we can fairly readily obtain values of the ratios Wt/ W0 and We/ W0 , as 
we will see next. Then Eq. (8.4) provides a relation from which W0 can be obtained 
in an iterative fashion. [The iteration is required because in Eq. (8.4 ), W ti W0 and 
We/Wo may themselves be functions of Wo.] 
8.3. l Estimation of WelW0 
Most airplane designs are evolutionary rather than revolutionary; that is, a new de­
sign is usually an evolutionary change from previously existing airplanes. For this 
reason, historical, statistical data on previous airplanes provide a starting point for the 
conceptual design of a new airplane. We will use such data here. In particular, Fig. 
8.1 is a plot of We/ W0 versus W0 for a number of reciprocating engine, propeller­
driven airplanes. Data for 19 airplanes covering the time period from 1930 to the 
present are shown. The data show a remarkable consistency. The values of We/ Wo 
tend to cluster around a horizontal line at We/ Wo = 0.62. For gross weights above 
10,000 lb, We/ W0 tends to be slightly higher for some of the aircraft. However, there 
is no technical reason.for this; rather, the higher values for the heavier airplanes are 
most likely an historical phenomenon. The P-51, B-10, P-38, DC-3, and B-26 are all 
examples of 1930's technology. A later airplane, the Lockheed P2V Neptune, is based 
399 

===== PDF PAGE 413 =====
400 P A R T 3 e Airplane Design 
LO I 
0.9 ~ 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
!03 
Figure S.1 
104 
Wo,!b 
Variation of the empfy-gross weight ratio W ef W o with gross weight for 
reciprocating-engine, propeller-dirven airplanes. 
on 1940s' technology, and it has a relatively low value of We/ W0 = 0.57. Eclipsed by 
jet-propelled airplanes, the design of heavy reciprocating engine/propeller-driven air­
planes in the gross weight class above 10,000 lb has virtually ceased since the 1950s. 
The last major airplanes of this class were the Douglas DC-7 and the Lockheed Super 
Constellation, both large, relatively luxurious passenger transports. Hence, reflected 
in Fig. 8.1, no modem airplanes are represented on the right side of the graph. In 
contrast, the data shown at the left of the graph, for gross weight less than 10,000 lb, 
are a mixture, representing airplanes from 1930 to the present 
As a result of the data shown in Fig. 8.1, we choose for our first estimate 
8.3.2 Estimation of flj/W 0 
We - =0.62 Wo 
[8.5] 
The amount of fuel required to carry out the mission depends critically on the ef­
ficiency of the propulsion device-the engine specific fuel consumption and the 

===== PDF PAGE 414 =====
C H A P T E R 8 11> Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
propeller efficiency. It also depends critically on the aerodynamic efficiency-the 
lift-to-drag ratio. These factors are principal players in the Brequet range equation 
given by Eq. (5.153), repeated here: 
R = 7/pr !::_ ln Wo 
CD W1 [5.153] 
Equation (5.153) is very important in our estimation of w1 / W0 , as defined below. 
The total fuel consumed during the mission is that consumed from the moment 
the engines are turned on at the airport to the moment they are shut down at the end 
of the flight. Between these times, the flight of the airplane can be described by a 
mission profile, a conceptual sketch of altitude versus time such as shown in Fig. 8.2. 
As stated in the specifications, the mission of our airplane is that of a business light 
transport, and therefore its mission profile is that for a simple cruise from one location 
to another. This is the mission profile shown in Fig. 8.2. It starts at the point labeled 
0, when the engines are first turned on. The takeoff segment is denoted by the line 
segment 0-1, which includes warm-up, taxiing, and takeoff. Segment 1-2 denotes 
the climb to cruise altitude (the use of a straight line here is only schematic and is 
not meant to imply a constant rate of climb to altitude). Segment 2-3 represents the 
cruise, which is by far the largest segment of the mission. Segment 2-3 shows an 
increase in altitude during cruise, consistent with an attempt to keep CL ( and hence 
L / D) constant as the airplane weight decreases because of the consumption of fuel. 
This is discussed at length in Section 5.13.3. Segment 3-4 denotes the descent, which 
generally includes loiter time to account for air traffic delays; for design purposes, a 
loiter time of 20 min is commonly used. Segment 4-5 represents landing. 
The mission profile shown in Fig. 8.2 is particularly simple. For other types 
of missions, especially those associated with military combat aircraft, the mission 
profiles will include such aspects as combat dogfighting, weapons drop, in-flight 
refueling, etc. For a discussion of such combat mission profiles, see, for example, 
Ta..l;:eoff Landing 
0 5 
Time 
Figure 8.2 Mission profile for a simple cruise. 
401 

===== PDF PAGE 415 =====
f' A R T 3 @ Airplane 
Ref. 25. For our purposes, we win deal wit,,1-i the simple crnise rnission 
sketched in Fig. 8.2. 
The mission is a useful tool to 
Each segment of the mission is associated with a 
the airplane weight at the end of t.h.e segment divided by the 
of the segment. 
Mission segment fraction = --
For example, the cruise weight fraction is where W3 is the airplane weight 
at the end of the cruise and W2 is the weight at the beginning of cruise. The fuel 
weight ratio can be obtained from the product of the mission segment weight 
fractions as follows. Using the mission profile in Fig. 8.2, the ratio of the airplane 
weight at the end of L'1e mission to the initial gross weight is W0 . In turn, 
Ws W1 W2 W3 W4 Ws =-----
Wo Wo W2 W4 
[8,6] 
111e right side of Eq. is simply the product of the individual mission segment 
weight fractions. Also, keep in mind that for the simple cruise mission shown in Fig. 
8.2, the change in weight during each segment is due to the consumption of fuel. If, 
at the end of the flight, the fu.el tanks were completely empty, then 
= Wo-Ws 
or 
[8.7] 
However, at the end of the mission, the fuel tanks are not completely empty-by 
design. There should be some fuel left in reserve at the end of the mission in case 
weather conditions or traffic problems require that the of the airplane divert to 
another airport, or spend a longer-than-normal time in a holding pattern. Also, the 
geometric design of the fuel tanks and the fuel system leads to some trapped fuel that 
is unavailable at the end of the flight Typically, a 6% allowance is made for reserve 
and trapped fueL Eq. (8.7) for this allowance, we have 
Wo - 'WWso) = 1.06 [8,8] 
Hence, the sequence for the calculation of that appears in the denominator 
ofEq. (8A) is as follows: 
1. Calculate each individual mission sei:m,c:m weight fraction 
etc., that appears in Eq. 
2. Calculate 
3. Calculate 

===== PDF PAGE 416 =====
CHAPTER 8 @ of a 
For takeoff, segment 
of 0.97. Hence, we assume 
historical data show that is on the order 
- =0.97 
For segment on historical data for a first estimate, 
which indicate that W2/ on the order of 0.985. we assume 
- =0.985 O] 
For cruise, segment 2-3, we make use of the range Eq. 
This requires an estimate of L / D. At this stage of our design process (pivot 
in Fig. 7.3), we cannot carry out a detailed aerodynamic to LID-we 
have not even laid out the shape of the 
4 in Fig. Therefore, we can 
based on data from existing Loftin has tabulated the values of 
for a number of famous aircraft over the past The values for 
some reciprocating engine/propeller-driven of the size 
to carry four to six people are tabulated below, obtained 
Airplane (liD)m 2 x 
Cessna 310 13 .0 
Beach Bonanza 13.8 
Cessna Cardinal 14.2 
= 14 
Also needed in the range fuel 
c and propeller efficiency 17. As stated in Section 3.3. , a value of specific fuel 
consumption for current aircraft engines is 0.4 lb of fuel consumed per 
""r~~'""'""'" per hour. In consistent that 1 = 550 we have 
1 h 
s 
C = 2.02 X 
A reasonable value for the 
r/pr = 0.85 3] 
403 

===== PDF PAGE 417 =====
P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Returning to Eq. (5.153), the ratio W0 / W1 in that equation is replaced for the mission 
segment 2-3 by W2/ W3 • Hence, from Eq. (5.153), 
R = 1'/pr !:... in W2 
CD W3 [1.14] 
Solving Eq. (8.14) for W2/ W3, we have 
Wz c R ln-=---
W3 1'/prL/D 
In Eq. (8.15), the range is stipulated in the requirements as R = 1,200 mi = 6.64 x 
106 ft. Also inserting the values given by Eqs. (8.11) to (8.13) into Eq. (8.15), we 
have 
l W2 _ 2.02 x 10-7 6.64 .x 106 _ O 2 n- - - .11 7 W3 0.85 14 
Hence, 
or 
W3 1 - = -- =0.893 W2 1.119 
[8.16] 
The loiter segment 3-4 in Fig. 8.2 is essentially the descent from cruise altitude 
to the landing approach. For our approximate calculations here, we will ignore 
the details of fuel consumption during descent, and just assume that the horizontal 
distance covered during descent is part of the required 1,200-mi range. Hence, for 
this assumption 
W4 = l 
W3 
[1.17] 
Finally, the fuel consumed during the landing process, segment 4-5, is also based 
on historical data. The amount of fuel used for landing is small, and based on previous 
airplanes, the value of Ws/ W4 is approximately 0.995. Hence, we assume for our 
airplane that 
Ws = 0.995 
ltf4 
[8.18] 
Collecting the various segment weight fractions from Eqs. (8.9), (8.10), (8.16), 
(8.17), and (8.18), we have from Eq. (8.6) 
Ws = Wi W2 W3 W4 Ws = (0.97)(0.985)(0.893)(1)(0.995) = 0.85 [8.19] 
Wo Wo W1 W2 W3 W4 

===== PDF PAGE 418 =====
C H A P T E R 8 ® Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
Inserting the value of W5 / W0 from Eq. (8.19) into Eq. (8.8), we have 
or 
- = 1.06 1 - - = 1.06(1 - 0.85) WJ ( Ws) 
W0 Wo 
WJ = 0.159 
Wo 
8.3.3 Caku.lation of W 0 
[8.20] 
Return to Eq. (8.4) for the design takeoff gross weight W0 . We have obtained a value 
for Wei W0 given by Eq. (8.5). We have also obtained a value for WJ / Wo given by 
Eq. (8.20). All we need to obtain W0 from Eq. (8.4) are values for the crew and 
payload weights Wcrew and Wpayload, respectively. 
Coming (Ref. 55) suggests the average passenger weight of 160 lb, plus 40 lb of 
baggage per passenger. A more recent source· is Raymer (Ref. 25) who suggests an 
average passenger weight of 180 lb (dressed and with carry-on bags), plus 40 to 60 lb 
of baggage per person in the cargo hold. For our airplane, there are five passengers 
and one pilot, six people in total. Let us assume the average weight per person is 
170 lb. Hence, since the only crew is the pilot, we assume 
Wcrew = 170 lb [8.21 J 
The payload is the five passengers, plus the baggage for all six people. The type of 
short business trip for which this airplane will most likely be used would require less 
baggage than a longer, intercontinental trip. Hence, it is reasonable to assume 20 lb 
of baggage per person rather than the 40 lb mentioned above. Thus, including the 
pilot's baggage, we have 
Wpayload = 5(170) + 6(20) = 970 lb [8.22] 
Inserting the values from Eqs. (8.5) and (8.20) to (8.22) into Eq. (8.4), we have 
Wo = Wcrew + Wpayload 
l - WJ!Wo - We/Wo 
1,140 I I = 0.221 = 1,140(4.525) = 5,158 lb 
170 + 970 
1 - 0.159 - 0.62 [8.23] 
This is our first estimate of the gross weight of the airplane. We have now completed 
pivot point 2 in Fig. 7.3. 
Important comment. The calculation in Eq. (8.23) clearly shows the amplified 
impact of crew and payload weight on the gross weight of the airplane. The am­
plification factor is 4.525; that is, for every increase of l lb of payload weight, the 
airplane's gross weight increases by 4.525 lb. For example, if we had allowed each 
person 40 lb of baggage rather than the 20 lb we chose, the design gross weight of 
the airplane would have increased by (6)(20)(4.525) = 543 lb, that is, more than a 

===== PDF PAGE 419 =====
P.A RT 3 ® Airplane 
10% increase in u'le gross weight. This is a dear demonstration of t'Je ,rn,r.n,>t<>r,,..,, 
of weight in airplane design. For our example, 1 lb saved in any m2mner--i-:1av102ta 
reduction, reduced structural weight, reduced fuel weight, etc.-resuhs in a 4.525-lb 
reduction in overall gross It is easy to see aeronautical are so 
weight-conscious. 
We also note that in our cakul.ation of 
independent of that independent of the gross 
assumption was based on previous piston-engine 
where we chose We/ W0 = independent of 
most classes of aircraft; in general, We/ is a function of 
25) gives empirical equations for this function for 13 different classes of aircraft. 
When We/ W0 is treated as a function of then the calculation of from 
(8.4) becomes an iteration. First, W0 has to be assumed. Then is obtained 
for this assumed W0 . Next, a new value of W0 is calculated from Eq. This new 
value of W0 is then used to estimate a new value of and t.'le calculation of 
from Eq. (8.4) is repeated. This iteration is continued until convergence is obtained. 
In our calculation above, an iterative process was not because we assumed 
that We/ Wo was a fixed value. 
Finally, let us calculate the fuel weight; this will become later in 
the fuel tanks. From Eq. (8.20), W1 / Wo = 0.159. Hence, 
Wr Wt=-· = (0.159)(5, = 820 lb 
The weight of aviation gasoline is 5.64 lb/gal. Hence, the capacity of the fuel tank 
( or tanks) should be 
820 Tank capacity= -- = 145.4 gal 5.64 
8.4 ESTIMATION OF THE CRITICAL 
PARAMETERS 
mance 
the requirements 
as maximum speed, range, 
takeoff distance. 
8.4.1 
This is the stage in the 
foil shape for the 
process where we make an initial choice for the air-
aviation have the 
NACA nv1e-c1u!1.t. and 6-series airfoil sections--the laminar-flow series. 

===== PDF PAGE 420 =====
2.4 
2.0 
t.6 
., j .4 
0 0 
,l.1 -.4 
l ::::·.Z •.8 
~ 
j·,3 ./.Z 
-.4 ./.6 
Figure 8.3 
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Aitplane 
J 
J 
~ 
' 
' 
} 
o-f,.,;..:. ,,. 060 
OlJ.9 
"'60 
It 
I 
I I 
I I 
-16 .lJ O 8 16 
Section angle of clfaclt 1 « .. cJe9 
Lift coefficient, moment coefficient, and airfoil shape 
for the NACA 23018 airfoil. 
The NACA five-digit airfoils have been particularly favored by the general aviation 
industry in the United States. These airfoils, such as the NACA 23018 and the NACA 
23012 shown in Figs. 8.3 and 8.4, respectively, were designed in the middle 1930s. 
The maximum camber was placed closer to the leading edge (at 0.15c for the two 
airfoils shown) than was the case for the earlier NACA four-digit airfoils. A benefit 
of this design is a higher (c1)max compared to the earlier airfoils. A disadvantage is 
the very sharp stalling behavior, as seen in Figs. 8.3 and 8.4. 
For many airplanes, including some general aviation aircraft, one airfoil section 
is used at the wing root, and another airfoil shape is used at the wing tip, with the airfoil 
407 

===== PDF PAGE 421 =====
P A R T 3 111 Airplane Design 
I I 
2." I I I! 
I I 
I I I 
VJ 
I 
1.5 
. I 
1.2 • r, 
.8 -
·" 'II 
I 
!1111111 
~~ 
>-,_ 
-;;< 
I 
' -. ' 
L R 
o 3.0,NJ' ,..,_,_ 
"6.0 OM 
.. 6.(J 
·- I I 1 
I I 
-~ I I 
·32 -24 -16 -6 (J (J If! ;u. ;,. 
figure 8.4 lift coeffidenl, moment coefficient, and airfoil shape 
for !he NACA 23012 airfoil. 
sections between the root and tip being a linear interpolation between the root and 
tip sections. Several examples from existing 
general aviation airplanes are tabulated 
below. 
Airplane 
Beechcraft Bonanza 
Beechcraft Baron 
Cessna Caravan 
Piper Cheyene 
Root Section 
NACA 23016.5 
NACA 23015.5 
NACA 23017.4 
NACA 63A415 
Tip Section 
NACA 23012 
NACA 23010.5 
NACA 23012 
NACA63A2l2 

===== PDF PAGE 422 =====
C H A P T E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
In these examples, the root airfoil section is relatively thick (about 15% to 17% ), 
and the wing airfoil shape tapers to a thinner section at the (about There 
are good reasons for this. Structurally, the wing bending moment is greatest at the 
root; a thicker airfoil readily allows the design for greater structural strength at the 
root. Aerodynamically, an 18 % airfoil will stall at a lower angle of attack than a 12 % 
airfoil. Hence, a wing which has airfoil sections which taper from 18% thick at the 
root to 12% thick at the will tend to stall first at the wing root, with attached flow 
still at the tip. The resulting buffeting that occurs at stall at the root is a warning to 
the pilot, while at the same time the ailerons remain effective because flow is still 
attached at the tip-both distinct advantages. Finally, a thicker wing section at the 
root allows additional volume for the storage of fuel in the wing. 
For all these reasons, we make an initial choice of the airfoil section for our 
airplane design as follows: at the root, an NACA 23018 section (Fig. 8.3); at the 
tip, an NACA 23012 section (Fig. 8.4). We will assume that a linear interpolation 
between the root and tip defines the local airfoil sections elsewhere along the wing. 
The resulting ( C dmax for the wing will be an average of the root and tip section 
values, depending on the planform taper ratio and the degree of geometric twist of the 
wing there is any). Also (Cdmax for the finite wing is less than that for the airfoil 
due to three-dimensional flow effects. Since we have not laid out the planform shape 
or twist distribution yet, we will assume that (CL )max is a simple average of those for 
the airfoil sections at the root and tip, reduced by 10% for the effect of a finite aspect 
ratio. For the NACA 23018, from Fig. 8.3, (c1)max = 1.6; for the NACA 23012, from 
Fig. 8.4, (c1)max = 1.8. Taking the average, we have for the averge airfoil maximum 
lift coefficient for our wing 
1.6 + 1.8 Average (c1)max = = 1.7 2 
To aid in the takeoff and landing performance, we will design the wing with 
trailing-edge flaps. For simplicity (and hence production cost savings), we choose a 
simple plain flap. From Fig. 5.28, such a flap deflected 45° will yield an increase in 
the airfoil maximum lift coefficient ti.(c1)max = 0.9. Hence, for our average airfoil 
maximum lift coefficient, we have 
Average (ci)max with 45° flap deflection = 1.7 + 0.9 = 2.6 
Finally, to account for the three-dimensional effect of the finite aspect ratio, 
Raymer (Ref. 25) suggests that, for finite wings with aspect ratio greater than 5, 
[8.24] 
Since we are designing a low-speed business, general aviation airplane, where efficient 
cruise is important, we most certainly will have a wing with an asepct ratio greater 
than 5. Hence, we use, as a preliminary estimate of maximum lift coefficient, from 
409 

===== PDF PAGE 423 =====
410 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Eq. (8.24) 
(Cdmax = 0.9(2.6) 
I (Cdmax = 2.341 [8.25] 
We will treat this as (Cdmax for the complete airplane, ignoring for the time being 
the effect of the fuselage, tail, and other parts of the configuration. 
8.4.2 Wing Loading WS 
In most airplane designs, wing loading. is determined by considerations of V81a11 and 
landing distance. However, W / S also plays a role in the maximum velocity of the 
airplane [see Eq. (5.50)]; Vmax increases as W / S increases. For our current airplane 
design, which is a low-speed aircraft, the primary constraints on W i S will be V81811 
and landing, and we will take that approach. From Eq. (5.67), repeated here: 
Vsta11 = 2 W 1 
Poo S ( C dmax 
[5.67) 
solving Eq. (5.67) for W / S, we have 
W 1 2 
S = 2Poo Vs1a11(Cdmax [8.26] 
The requirements specify Vsta11 ::: 70mi/ h = 102.7 ft/s. Using (Cdmax from Eq. 
(8.25) and making the calculation at sea level, where p00 = 0.002377 slug/ft3, we 
have from Eq. (8.26) 
: = ~(0.002377)(102.7)2(2.34) = 29.3 lb/ft2 [8.27] 
Equation (8.27) gives us the value of W / S constrained by the stalling velocity. 
Let us examine the constraint imposed by the specified landing distance. In Fig. 
6.17, the landing distance is the sum of the approach distance Sa, the flare distances I, 
and the ground roll s8 • The approach angle Oa is given by Eq. (6.104), which requires 
knowledge of L/ D and T /W. Since we have not made estimates of either quantity 
yet, we assume, based on the rule of thumb that Oa ::: 3° for transport aircraft, that 
Oa = 3°. Following the discussion of approach distance in Section 6.8.1, we have, 
from Eq. (6.107) for the flight path radius during flare, 
vz R=-' 0.2g [6.107) 
InEq. (6.107), v1 is the average velocity during flare, given by Vt = l.23Vsta1J· From 
our design, v1 = 1.23(102.7) = 126.3 ft/s. From Eq. (6.107) 
R = (l 26·3)2 = 2,477 ft 
0.2(32.2) 

===== PDF PAGE 424 =====
410 P A R T 3 @ Airplane Design 
Eq. (8.24) 
(CLJmax = 
(CLJmax = 2.34 [8.25] 
We will treat this as (CL)max for the complete airplane, ignoring for the time being 
the effect of the fuselage, tail, and other parts of the configuration. 
8.4.2 Wing Loading WS 
In most airplane designs, wing loading is determined by considerations of Vsian and 
landing distance. However, W / S also plays a role in the maximum velocity of the 
airplane [see Eq. (5.50)]; Vmax increases as W / S increases. For our current airplane 
design, which is a low-speed aircraft, the primary constraints on W / S will be V,rnn 
and landing, and we will take that approach. From Eq. (5.67), repeated here: 
Vstall = J p:: (CL~max 
solving Eq. (5.67) for W / S, we have 
W l 2 
S = 2Poo Vsian(Cdmax [8.26] 
The requirements specify Vstall ::S 70mi / h = 102. 7 ft/s. Using ( C dmax from Eq. 
(8.25) and making the calculation at sea level, where p 00 = 0.002377 slug/ft3 , we 
have from Eq. (8.26) 
; = ~(0.002377)(102.7)2(2.34) = 29.3 lb/ft2 [8.27] 
Equation (8.27) gives us the value of W / S constrained by the stalling velocity. 
Let us examine the constraint imposed by the specified landing distance. In Fig. 
6.17, the landing distance is the sum of the approach distance Sa, the flare distances f, 
and the ground roll Sg, The approach angle ea is given by Eq. (6.104), which requires 
knowledge of L / D and T / W. Since we have not made estimates of either quantity 
yet, we assume, based on the rule of thumb that ea :::; 3° for transport aircraft, that 
e,, = 3°. Following the discussion of approach distance in Section 6.8.l, we have, 
from Eq. (6.107) for the flight path radius during flare, 
v2 
R = _f [6,107] 
0.2g 
In Eq. (6. is the average velocity during flare, by Vr = 1.23 V,!llll· From 
our design, v1 = 1.23(102.7) = 126.3 fi/s. From Eq. (6.107) 
R = (lZ 6.3)2 = 2,477 ft 
0.2(32.2) 

===== PDF PAGE 425 =====
C H A P T E R 8 e Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
From Eq. (6.106), the flare height hf is given by 
-cos = 2,477(1 - cos 3°) = 3.4 ft 
Finally, from Eq. (6.108), the approach distance required to dear a 50-fi obstacle is 
given by 
50-hf 50-3.4 
Sa= = = 889 ft Tan 8a Tan 3° 
The flare distance SJ is given by Eq. (6.109): 
SJ= R sin ea= 2,477 sin3° = 130 ft 
An approximation for ground roll sg is given by Eq. (6.123). In that equation, 
let us assume that lift has been intentionally made small by retracting the flaps com­
bined with a small angle of attack due to the rather level orientation of the airplane 
relative to the ground. (We are assuming that we will use tricycle landing gear for 
the airplane.) Furthermore, assuming no provision for thrust reversal, and ignoring 
the drag compared to the friction force between the tires and the ground, Eq. (6.123) 
simplifies further to 
[8.28] 
As stated in Section 6.8.3, j = 1.15 for commercial airplanes. Also, N is the time 
increment for free 
roll immediately after touchdown, before the brakes are applied. 
By assuming N = 3 sandµ, = 0.4, Eq. (8.28) becomes 
/ 2 W 1 (Ll5)2(W / S) 
Sg = (US)( 3\/ 0.002377 S 2.34 + (32.2)(0.002377)(2.34)(0.4) 
or 
{w w 
Sg = 65.4y S + 18.46 5 [8.29] 
Since the allowable landing distance is specified in the requirements as 2,200 ft, and 
we have previously estimated that Sa = 889 ft and sf = 130 ft, the allowable value 
for s8 is 
Sg = 2,200 - 889 - 130 = l, 181 ft 
Inserting this value for sg into Eq. (8.29), we have 
/w w 1,rn1 = 65.4v s + 1s.46 5 [8.30] 
Equation (8.30) is a quadratic equation for JWTS. Using the quadratic formula, we 
obtain 
W = 41.5 lb/ft 2 
s [8.31] 
411 

===== PDF PAGE 426 =====
412 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Compare the value of W / S = 41.5 lb/ft2 obtained from the landing distance 
constraint, Eq. (8.31), with the value of W/S = 29.3 lb/ft2 obtained from the stall 
constraint, Eq. (8.27). Clearly, if W / S < 41.5 lb/ft2, the landing distance will be 
shorter than 2,200 ft, clearly satisfying the requirements. Hence, for our airplane 
design, W / S is determined from the specified stall velocity, namely, 
: = 29.3 lb/ft2 [8.32] 
The value of W / S from Eq. (8.32) along with that for W0 from Eq. (8.23) allows 
us to obtain the wing area. 
S = Wo = 5,158 = / 116 ft2 / 
W/S 29.3 [8.33] 
8.4.3 Thrust-to-Weight Ratio 
The value of T / W determines in part the takeoff distance, rate of climb, and maximum 
velocity. To obtain the design value of T / W, we have to examine each of these three 
constraints. 
First, let us consider the takeoff distance, which is specified as 2,500 ft to clear 
a 50-ft obstacle. Using Eq. (6.95) to estimate the ground roll, we have 
1.21(W /S) 
Sg=-------
gpoo(Cdmax(T I W) 
(6.95) 
where (CL)max in Eq. (6.95) is that value with the flaps only partially extended, 
consistent with their takeoff setting. Hence, we need to recalculate ( C dmax for this 
case. Following the guidance provided in Table 5.3, we assume a flap deflection 
of 20° for takeoff. To return to Fig. 5.28, the D.(c1)max for a 45° flap deflection is 
0.9. Assuming a linear variation of D.(cdmax with flap deflection angle, we have for 
takeoff D.(c1)max = 0.9(25/45) = 0.5. Hence, for the wing, the average (c1)max with 
a 20° flap deflection is 1. 7 + 0.5 = 2.2. Taking into account the finite aspect ratio, as 
discussed in Section 8.4.1, we have for the wing 
(Cdmax = 0.9(ct)max = 0.9(2.2) = 1.98 
This is the takeoff value of (Cdmax that will be used in Eq. (6.95). Returning to Eq. 
(6.95), we have 
1.21 (WIS) (1.21)(29.3) 233.9 
Sg = gp00 (Cdmax(T/W) = (32'.2)(0.002377)(1.98)(T/W) = T/W [8.34] 
Recall from our discussion in Section 6. 7 .1 that when T varies with velocity, as it does 
for a propeller-driven airplane, the value of T /Win Eq. (6.95) is assumed to be that for 
a velocity Voo = 0.7VLo, where VLo is the liftoff velocity, taken as VLo = 1.1 Vsta1I· 
To calculate the distance while airborne to clear an obstacle (Section 6.7.2), we 
need the value of Vstall corresponding to the ( C dmax with flaps in the takeoff position, 

===== PDF PAGE 427 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
that is, corresponding for our case to (Cdmax = 1.98. From Eq. (5.67) 
2 W ---
Poo S (Cdmax 
Vstall = --2-(-29_.3_) __ = 111.6 ft/s 
(0.002377)(1.98) 
From Eq. (6.98), the flight path radius is 
6.96(Vstall)2 R=---­g 
6.96(111.6)2 = 2,692 ft 
32.2 
From Eq. (6.99), the included flight path angle is 
1 ( hos) eos = Cos - 1 - R 
where hos is the obstacle height, hos = 50 ft, so 
e0 s = Cos- 1 (1 - 2.~~2 ) = 11.06° 
From Eq. (6.100), the airborne distance is 
Sa= R sineos = 2,692sin 11.06° = 516.4 ft 
Combining Eqs. (8.34) and (8.35), we have 
or 
233.9 
Sg +Sa= 2,500 = T/W + 516.4 
(:) 0.7Vw 
233.9 
2,500-516.4 = 0·118 
This is the value of required T / W at a velocity 
V00 = 0.7Vw = 0.7(1.1 Vsran) = 0.7(1.1)(111.6) = 85.9 ft/s 
(6.99) 
[8.35] 
[8.36] 
At this velocity, the power required to take off at the gross weight W0 = 5,158 lb [see 
Eq. (8.23)] is 
T PR= TV00 = W WoV00 = (0.118)(5,158)(85.9) = 5.228 x 104 ft-lb/s [8.37] 
This power required must equal the power available PA, obtained from Eq. (3.13). 
PA = T/prP 
Solving Eq. (3.13) for the shaft brake power P, we have 
p = PA 
T/pr 
[3.13] 
[8.38] 
Typical propeller efficiencies are shown in Fig. 3.7. In our design we choose to use 
a constant-speed propeller. Hence, from Fig. 3.7, it appears reasonable to assume 
413 

===== PDF PAGE 428 =====
414 P A -R T 3 • Airplane Design 
7/pr = 0.8. Hence, the shaft brake power from the engine sh9uld be at least [from Eq. 
(8.38)] 
PA 5.228 X 104 P = - = = 6.535 x Hf ft-Ibis 'Ip: 0.8 
Since 550 ft-Ibis = 1 hp, we have 
= 6.535 X 104 = 118 8 h 
p 550 . p 
As stated in Section 3.3.1, for a reciprocating engine Pis reasonably constant with 
V00 • Hence, to satisfy the takeoff constraint, the total power must be at least 
P 2: 118.8 hp [8.39] 
Next, let us consider the constraint due to the specified rate of climb of 1,000 
ft/min at sea level. Here, we need to make an estimate of the zero-lift drag coefficient 
C D,O· We will use the same approach as illustrated in Example 2.4. From Fig. 2.54, for 
single-engine general aviation airplanes, the ratio of wetted area to the wing reference 
area is approximately Swed Srer = 4. The skin-friction coefficient C fe is shown as 
a function of Reynolds number in Fig. 2.55, where some data points for various jet 
airplanes are also plotted. Our airplane design will probably be about the same size 
as that of some early jet fighters, but with about one-third the speed. Hence, based 
on mean length, a relevant Reynolds number for us is about 107 . For this case, Fig. 
2.55 yields 
Cte = 0.0043 
Hence, from Eq. (2.37) 
Swet Co,o = sCfe = (4)(0.0043) 
or 
Co,o = 0.017 [8.40] 
We also need an estimate for the coefficient K that appears in the drag polar, Eq. 
(2.47), repeated here: 
Co= Co,o + KC£ 
where, from Eqs. (2.43) to (2.46), 
c2 
K = k1 +k2 +k3 = k1 +k2 + __ L_ 
,reAR 
[2.47] 
[8.41] 
In Eq. (8.41), e is the span efficiency factor to account for a nonelliptical lift distri­
bution along the span of the wing, and CEf (,r eAR) is the induced drag coefficient. 

===== PDF PAGE 429 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
Let us estimate the value of K to be consistent with the earlier assumed value of 
(L/ D)max = 14 [see Eq. (8.11)). From Eq. (5.30), 
(~)max= I 4C;,oK 
[5.30) 
we have 
1 1 K= . =-----4C v,o(L / D)~ 4(0.017)(14)2 
or 
I K = 0.0751 [8.42) 
This estimate for K also allows an estimate of the aspect ratio, as follows. It is 
conventional to define another efficiency factor, the Oswald efficiency e0 , as 
Cf Cf 2 
--= k1 + k2 + -- = KCL 1re0AR :,reAR 
[8.43) 
A reasonable estimate for e0 for a low-wing general aviation airplane is 0.6 (see 
McCormick, Ref. 50). From Eq. (8.42), 
1 1 AR= -- = -----
1re0K :,r(0.6)(0.075) 
or 
I AR=7.07 I [8.44) 
Finally, to return to the consideration of rate of climb, Eq. (5.122) gives an 
expression for maximum rate of climb for a propeller-driven airplane as 
( 7/prP ( 2 /;f W)
112 
1.155 R/C)max = -- - - -W Poo S (L/ D)max 
[5.122) 
Solving for the power term, we have 
7/prP ( 2 /KW) 112 1.155 
W = (R/ C)max + Poo V ~ S (L/ D)max [8.45) 
Everything on the right side of Eq. (8.45) is known, including (R/ C)max which from 
the specifications is 1,000 ft/min= 16.67 ft/sat sea level. Hence, from Eq. (8.45), 
1/2 
7/prP 16 [ 2 0.075 3 ] 1.155 
W = ·67 + 0.002377 3(0.017) (29· ) 14 [8.45a) 
7/prP W = 16.67 + 14.26 = 30.93 ft/s 
415 

===== PDF PAGE 430 =====
416 P A R T 3 e Airplane Design 
Assuming Wis equal to the takeoff gross weight W0 = 5,158 lb (ignoring the small 
amount of fuel burned during the takeoff run), and recalling our estimate of 17pr = 0. 8, 
we have from Eq. (8.45) 
30.93 Wo (30.93)(5, 158) 5 
p = = = 1.994 X 10 ft,lb/s 
17pr 0.8 
In terms of horsepower, 
1.994 X 105 
P = = 362.5 hp 550 [8.46] 
Thus, to satisfy the constraint on rate of climb, the power must be 
P ::': 362.5 hp 
The third constraint on T / W ( or P / W) is the maximum velocity V max. The 
requirements stipulate Vmax = 250 mi/h = 366.7 ft/s at midcruise weight. The 
altitude for the specified Vmax is not stated. However, the requirements call for a 
pressurized cabin, and we can 
safely assume that an altitude of 20,000 ft would be 
comfortable for the pilot and passengers. Therefore, we assume that the specified 
V max is associated with level flight at 20,000 ft. In level flight, T = D, and the drag 
Dis given by Eq. (5.12) 
l 2 2KS (W) 2 
T = D = -p V SCD O + -- -2 00 00 • · v2 s Poo 00 
Couching Eq. (5.12) in terms of the thrust-to-weight ratio, we have 
T 1 2 CD,O 2K w 
w = 2 Poo v 00 w; s + Poo v~ s 
[5.12] 
[8.48] 
Since the requirements stipulate Vmax at midcruise weight, the value of W that appears 
in Eq. (8.48) is less than the gross takeoff weight. To return to our weight estimates in 
Section 8.3, W2 and W3 are the weights at the beginning and end of cruise, respectively. 
We have, from Section 8.3.2, 
W2 Wi W2 - = -- = (0.97)(0.985) = 0.955 
Wo Wo Wi 
Hence, 
W2 = 0.955Wo = 0.955(5, 158) = 4,926 lb 
At midcruise ( defined here as when one-half of the fuel needed to cover the full cruise 
range is consumed), we have for the midcruise weight W MC 
WMc = W2 - !(W2 - W3) 
or 
[8.49] 

===== PDF PAGE 431 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a,Pl'opeller-Driven Airplane 
The weight fraction W3/W2 has been estimated in Eq. (8.16) as W3 /W2 = 0.893. 
Hence, from Eq. (8.49) 
WMc 1 - = -(1 + 0.893) = 0.9465 W2 2 
Since W2 = 4,926 as obtained above, we have 
WMc = (0.9465)(4,926) = 4,662 lb (8.50] 
This weight is used to define the new wing loading that goes into Eq. (8.48). This 
value is [recalling from Eq.-18.33) that S = 176 ft2] 
WMc = 4,662 = 26.5 lb/ft2 
S 176 
Returning to Eq. (8.48), written in terms of the midcruise weight, we have 
(8.51] 
From Appendix B, at 20,000 ft, p00 = 0.0012673 slug/ft3• Also, inserting Vmax = 
366.7 ft/s for V00 in Eq; (8.51), we have 
T 1 6 2 0.017 2(0.075)(26.5) 
WMc = 2<0·0012673)(3 6·7) 26.5 + (0.0012673)(366.7) 2 (8.52] 
= 0.0547 + 0.0233 = 0.0780 
Comment: It is interesting to note that the two terms on the right side of Eq. (8.51) 
represent the effects of zero-lift drag and drag due to lift, respectively. In the above 
calculation, the zero-lift drag is about 2.3 times larger than the drag due to lift. This 
is consistent with the usull situation that as speed increases, the drag due to lift 
becomes a smaller percentage of the total drag. In this case, the drag due to lift is 
0.0233/0.0780 = 0.3 of the total drag, or less than one-third of the total drag. 
The shaft power required P is given by 
T/prP = TV00 (8.53] 
At Vmax at midcruise weight, Eq. (8.53) is written as 
1 T 1 P = ---WMcVmax = -(0.0780)(4,662)(366.7) = 1.667 x 105 ft•lb/s 
T/pr WMc 0.8 
In terms of horsepower, 
1.667 X 105 . 
P = . = 303.1 hp 550 (8.54] 
417 

===== PDF PAGE 432 =====
!' A R T 3 ® Airplane Design 
To summarize the results from this section, the three constraints on power required 
for om airplane design have led to the following: 
Takeoff 
Rate ofdimb 
Maximum velocity 
P ::: 118.8 hp 
P::: 362.5 
P :::: 303.1 
Clearly, the specification of the maximum rate of climb at sea level of 1,000 ft/min 
is the determining factor of the required power from the engine. For our airplane 
design, the engine should be capable of producing a mmdmum power of 362.5 hp or 
greater. 
We can couch this result in terms of the more relevant performance parameters 
T / W or P / W. When these parameters are quoted for a given airplane, the is 
usually taken as the gross takeoff weight W0 . Hence, for our design 
362.5 hp 
Power-to-weight ratio= S,lSS lb = 0.07 
For a propeller-driven airplane, the power-to-weight ratio is more relevant than t_he 
thrust-to-weight ratio, which makes more sense to quote for jet airplanes. For a 
reciprocating engine/propeller-driven airplane, the shaft power is essentially constant 
with velocity, whereas the thrust decreases with velocity, as discussed in Chapter 3. 
Hence, for a reciprocating engine/propeller-driven airplane, to quote the power-to­
weight ratio makes more sense. In the aeronautical literature, historically the power 
loading, which is the reciprocal of the power-to-weight ratio, i:s frequently given. 
w 
Power loading = p 
The definition of the power loading is semantically analogous to that for the wing 
loading W / S. The wing loading is the weight divided by wing area; the power loading 
is the weight divided by the power. For our airplane, we have estimated that 
W 1 
Power loading p = O.O? = 14.3 lb/hp 
[We note that Raymer (Ref. 25) quotes a typical value of 14 for general aviation 
single-engine airplanes-so our estimation appears to be very reasonable.] 
There is something important that is in our discussion of the 
characteristics. Although the engine is sized at 362.5 to meet the rate .. of-climb 
specification at sea level, it must also 303.1 at 20,000 ft to achieve the 
specified maximum velocity. Since the power of a conventional engine 
is proportional to the air density [see Eq. 1 such a conventional engine sized at 
362.5 hp at sea level will produce 193 hp at 20,000 unacceptable for 
meeting our specifications. Hence, the engine for our airplane must be 
to maintain sea-level power to an altitude of 20,000 ft 

===== PDF PAGE 433 =====
C H A P r E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
8.5 SUMMARY OF THE CRITICAL PERFOR."l\1ANCE 
PARAMETERS 
We have now completed pivot point 3 in Fig. 7 .3, namely, the first estimate of the crit­
ical performa.nce parameters from airplane design. They are sumn1.arized as follows: 
Maximum lift coefficient 
Maximum lift-to-drng ratio 
Wing loading 
Power loading 
(Cdmax = 2.34 
( L) = 14 
D max 
; = 29.3 lb/ft 2 
w p = 14.3 lb/hp 
In the process of estimating these performance parameters, we have found other 
characteristics of our airplane: 
Takeoff gross weight 
Fuel weight 
Fuel tank capacity 
Wing area 
High-lift device 
Zero-lift drag coefficient 
Drag-due-to-lift coefficient 
Aspect ratio 
Propeller efficiency 
Engine power, supercharged to 20,000 ft 
Wo = 5, 158 lb 
Wt= 820 lb 
145.4 gal 
S = 176 
Single-slotted trailing-edge flaps 
Cv,o = 0.017 
K = 0.075 
AR= 7.07 
0.8 
362.5 hp 
We are now ready to draw a picture of our airplane design, t.11at is, to construct a 
configuration layout This is the subject of the next section. 
8.6 CONFIGURATION LAYOUT 
We now move to pivot point 4 in Fig. 7.3-the configuration layout Based on the 
information we have calculated so far in this chapter, we are ready to draw a picture, 
with dimensions, of our airplane. Even though the data summarized in Section 8.5 
clearly define a certain type of airplane, there are still an infinite number of different 
sizes and shapes that could satisfy these data. There are no specific laws or rules that 
419 

===== PDF PAGE 434 =====
420 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
tell us exactly what the precise dimensions and shape ought· to be. Therefore, pivot 
point 4 in our intellectual process of airplane design is where intuition, experience, 
and the art of airplane design most strongly come into play. It is impossible to convey 
these assets in one particular section of one particular book. Rather, our purpose here 
is to simply illustrate the philosophy that goes into the configuration layout. 
8.6. 1 Overall Type of Configuration 
There are some basic configuration decisions to make up front. Do we use one or 
two engines? Do we use a tractor (propeller in front) or a pusher (propeller in back) 
arrangement ( or both)? .Will the wing position be low-wing, mid-wing, or high-wing? 
(Indeed, do we have two wings, i.e., a biplane configuration? This is not very likely 
in modern airplane designs; the biplane configuration was essentially phased out in 
__ the 1930s, although today there are good reasons to consider the biplane for aerobatic 
and agricultural airplanes. We will not consider the biplane configuration here.) 
First, let us consider the number of engines. The weight of 5,158 lb puts our 
airplane somewhat on the borderline of single- and twin-engine general aviation air­
planes. We could have a rather heavy single-engine airplane, or a light twin-engine 
one. We need 362.5 hp-can we get that from a single, existing piston engine? (We 
have to deal with an existing engine; rarely is a new general aviation airplane design 
enough incentive for the small engine manufacturers to go to the time and expense 
of designing a new engine.) Examining the available piston engines at the time of 
writing, we find that the Textron Lycoming TIO/LTI0-540-V is rated at 360 hp su­
percharged to 18,000 ft. This appears to be the engine for us. It is only 2.5 hp less 
than our calculations show is required based on the rate-of-climb specification. We 
could tweak the airplane design, say, by slightly reducing the weight or slightly in­
creasing the aspect ratio, both of which would reduce the power required for climb 
and would allow us to meet the performance specification with this engine. The fact 
that it is supercharged to 18,000 ft, not the 20,000 ft we assumed for our consider­
ation of Vmax, is not a problem. The free-stream density ratio between 20,000 and 
18,000 ft is 1.2673/1.3553 = 0.935. Hence, the engine power at 20,000 ft will be 
(360 hp)(0.935) = 336.6 hp. This is more than enough to meet the calculated re­
quirement of 303.1 hp for Vmax at 20,000 ft. Therefore, we choose a single-engine 
configuration, using the following engine with the following characteristics: 
Textron Lycoming TIO/LTI0-540-V Piston Engine 
Rated power output at sea level (turbosupercharged to 18,000 ft): 360 hp 
Number of cylinders: 6 
Compression ratio: 7.3 
Dry weight: 54 7 lb 
Length: 53.21 in 
Width: 34.88 in 
Height: 24.44 in 

===== PDF PAGE 435 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
Question: Do we adopt a tractor or a pusher configuration? The tractor configm:ation­
engine and propeller at the front-is illustrated in Fig. 8.5a; the pusherconfiguration­
engine and propeller at the back-is illustrated in Fig. 8.5b. Some of the advantages 
and disadvantages of these configurations are itemized below. 
Tractor Configuration Advantages: 
1. The heavy engine is at the front, which helps to move the center of gravity 
forward and therefore allows a smaller tail for stability considerations. 
2. The propeller is working in an undisturbed free stream. 
3. There is a more effective flow of cooling air for the engine. 
Disadvantages: 
1. The propeller slipstream disturbs the quality of the airflow over the fuselage 
and wing root. 
2. The increased velocity and flow turbulence over the fuselage due to the 
propeller slipstream increase the local skin friction on the fuselage. 
Pusher Configuration Advantages: 
1. Higher-quality (clean) airflow prevails over the wing and fuselage. 
2. The inflow to the rear.propeller induces a favorable pressure gradient at the rear 
of the fuselage, allowing the fuselage to close at a steeper angle without flow 
separation (see Fig. 8.5b ). This in tum allows a shorter fuselage, hence smaller 
wetted surface area. 
3. Engine noise in the cabin area is reduced. 
4. The pilot's front field of view is improved. 
Figure 8.5 
(a) Tractor 
(b) Pusher 
Comparison of a tractor and a 
pusher configuration. 
421 

===== PDF PAGE 436 =====
422 P A R T 3 @ Airplane Design 
Disadvantages: 
l. The heavy engine is at the back, which shifts the center of gravity rearward, 
hence reducing longitudinal stability. 
2. Propeller is more likely to be damaged by flying debris at landing. 
3. Engine cooling problems 
are more severe. 
The Wright Flyer was a pusher aircraft (Fig. 1.3). However, over the past century 
of airplane design, the tractor configuration has been the prevalent choice. Because 
we have a rather large, powerful reciprocating engine for our aiplane design, we wish 
to minimize any engine cooling problems. Therefore, we will be traditional and 
choose the tractor configuration. 
8.6.2 Wing Configuration 
Here, we have two considerations, the geometric shape of the wing and its location 
relative to the fuselage. First, we consider the shape. 
Referring to Fig. 8.6, the wing geometry is described by (a) aspect ratio, (b) wing 
sweep, (c) taper ratio, (d) variation of airfoil shape and thickness along the span, and 
(e) geometric twist (change in airfoil chord incidence angle along the span). The 
aspect ratio is given by b2 / S, as shown in Fig. 8.6a. There are two sweep angles of 
importance, the leading-edge sweep angle ALE and the sweep angle of the quarter­
chord line Ac;4 , as shown in Fig. 8.6b. The leading-edge sweep angle is most relevant 
to supersonic airplanes because to reduce wave drag, the leading edge should be swept 
behind the Mach cone (see Fig. 2.30 and the related discussion in Chapter 2). The 
sweep angle of the quarter-chord line Ac;4 is of relevance to high-speed subsonic 
airplanes near the speed of sound. The taper ratio is the ratio of the tip chord to the 
root chord c1 /Cr, illustrated in Fig. 8.6c. The possible variation of airfoil shape and 
thickness along the span is illustrated in Fig. 8.6d. Geometric twist is illustrated in 
Fig. 8.6e, where the root and tip chord lines are at different incidence angles. Shown 
in Fig. 8.6e is the case when the tip chord incidence angle is smaller than that of the 
root chord; this configuration is called washout. The opposite case, when the tip is at 
a higher incidence angle than the root, is called wash-in. 
Let us proceed with the determination of the planform shape (top view) of the 
wing of our airplane. The decision in regard to a swept wing versus an unswept wing 
is easy. The maximum design velocity of our airplane is 250 mi/h-far below the 
transonic regime; hence, we have no aerodynamic requirement for a swept wing. We 
choose to use a conventional straight wing. For minimum induced drag, we noted in 
Section 2.8.3 that we want to have a spanwise elliptical lift distribution, which for an 
untwisted wing implies an elliptical planform shape. However, the higher production 
costs associated with a wing with curved leading and trailing edges in the pianform 
view are 
usually not justified in view of the cheaper costs of manufacturing wings with 
straight leading and trailing edges. Moreover, by choosing the correct taper ratio, the 
elliptical lift distribution can be closely approximated. Recall from Eq. (2.31) that 
the span efficiency factor e is given by the ratio + 8), where 8 is plotted in Fig. 
2.39 as a function of aspect ratio and taper ratio. Reflecting again on Fig. 2.39, we 

===== PDF PAGE 437 =====
C H A P T E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven 
--~ 
Tip 
(a) Aspect ratio, AR es f 
(b) Wing sweep 
(c) Taperratio, l =~' r 
(d) Variation of airfoil 
thickness and shape 
along the span. 
(e) Geometric twist 
figure 3.6 The various characteristics lhai define wing shape. 
see that, for our ratio of 
ratio = 0.3. That 
1. The smaller 
has to do with the Sl,,~<.UWIUP', "'"""''°'N moment it 
creates at the root. As A decreases from 1.0 (a'"'''"''"''"'"" as shown in 

===== PDF PAGE 438 =====
424 
T 
P A R T 3 @ Airplane Design 
Fig. 8.7a) to O (a triangular wing with a pointed tip, as shown in Fig. 8.7b), the 
preponderance of the lifting force shifts inboard, closer to the wing root. This is 
clearly seen from the lift distributions (obtained from lifting-line theory) shown in 
Fig. 8.8; as the taper decreases, the centroid of the lift distribution (center of 
pressure) moves closer to the root of the wing. In tum, the moment arm from the 
root to the center of pressure deceases, and the bending moment at the root 
decreases, the lift staying the same. As a result, the wing structure can be made 
lighter. This trend is a benefit obtained from using a small taper ratio. 
2. On the other hand, wings with low taper ratios exhibit undesirable flow 
separation and stall behavior. This is illustrated schematically in Fig. 8.9, which 
shows the different regions of flow separation at the beginning of stall for wings at 
three different taper ratios. A rectangular wing, A = 1.0, shown in Fig. 8.9a, will 
develop flow separation first in the root region. This location for flow separation has 
two advantages: (1) The separated, turbulent flow trails downstream from the root 
region and causes buffeting as it flows over the horizontal tail, thus senring as a 
dramatic stall warning to the pilot. (2) The wing-tip region still has attached flow, 
and because the ailerons (for lateral control) are located in this region, the pilot still 
has full aileron control. However, as the taper ratio decreases, the region where flow 
separation first develops moves out toward the tip, which is shown in Fig. 8.9b for a 
taper ratio on the order of 0.5. When>-. is reduced to 0, as shown in Fig. 8.9c, the 
stall region first occurs at the tip region, 
with consequent total loss of aileron 
control. This characteristic is usually not tolerated in an airplane, and this is why we 
see virtually no airplanes designed with wings with zero (or very small) taper ratios. 
This trend is definitely a detriment associated with using small taper ratios. 
T 
I 
I ... ' ____ l_=_l_.o ___ ___. 
c, (a) 
I "' _l 
"' Elliptical distribution 
~ 
T 
r 
Figure 8.7 
(b) 
lllustralions of wings with 
!aper ratio equal lo 1 and 0. 
·a ::, 
'-< <!) 
a. 
el:; 
;_J 
0 
Root 
figure 8.8 
S •, l . y panwi,e ocatton b/2 
l 
1 
l 
l.O 
Tip 
Effect of taper roiio on lift distribution. 
= LO 
=0.5 
=0 

===== PDF PAGE 439 =====
C H A P T E R 8 111 Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
(a) 1 = 1.0 
(b)l =0.5 
(c) 1 = 0 
Effect of loper ratio on wing region of Aow 
separation al near-stall conditions. 
So, as usual, airplane design is a compromise-in this case a compromise between 
the structural benefit of small J.. and the aerodynamic benefit of large A. Historically, 
most straight-wing airplanes incorporate taper ratios on the order of 0.4 to 0.6. In 
fact, some general aviation airplanes, for the sake of minimizing the cost of wing 
manufacture, have rectangular wings (A = 1.0). For our airplane design, we will 
choose a taper ratio of 0.5-a suitable compromise. Note from Fig. 2.39 that for 
A = 0.5 and AR = 7, o = 0.013; with J.. = 0.5 the induced drag is still only 
about 1.3% larger than the theoretical minimum. Hence, J.. = 0.5 appears to be 
an acceptable choice. The plan view for our wing design, with AR = 7 .07, S = 
176 ft, and A= 0.5, can now be drawn to scale; it is shown in Fig. 8.10. The linear 
dimensions shown in Fig. 8.10 are readily obtained as follows. 
Hence, 
b2 
ARs­S 
b = j(S)(AR) = )(176)(7.07) = 35.27 ft 
425 

===== PDF PAGE 440 =====
426 P A R T 3 @ Airplane Design 
Tl' ---------~ I -T 
I I 
6.65 ft 3.325 ft 
I 
- ..L 
lL, --------~ ~ I 
:--.: ----17.64ft----1 
Figura 8.10 Scale plan view of our wing design. 
The planform shape is a trapezoid. The area of a trapezoid is given by !(a+ b)h, 
where a and b are the two parallel sides and h is the altitude. The area shown in Fig. 
8.10 is one-half the total wing area, and the parallel sides a and bare c1 and c,. The 
altitude is b /2. Hence, from the formula for the trapezoidal area, we have 
or 
s l b 
2 = 2(C1 + c,)2 
2S = (c1 + c,)b 
Dividing Eq. (8.55) by c,, we have 
2S - =(A+ l)b 
or 
and 
c, 
c = 2S = 2(176) = 6.65 ft 
' (A+ l)b (0.5 + 1)(35.27) 
Ct = A.Cr = 0.5(6.65) = 3.325 ft 
~ = 35·27 = 17.64 ft 2 2 ' . 
These are the dimensions shown in Fig. 8.10. 
[8.55] 

===== PDF PAGE 441 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
The mean aerodynamic chord c is defined as the chord length that, when multi­
plied by the wing area, the dynamic pressure,· and the moment coefficient about the 
aerodynamic center, yields the 
value of the aerodynamic moment about the airplane's 
aerodynamic center. It can be calculated from 
1 lb/2 c= - c2 dy 
S -b/2 
[8.56] 
where c is the local value of chord length at any spanwise location. Raymer (Ref. 
25) gives a convenient geometric construction for finding the length and the spanwise 
location of c, as illustrated in Fig. 8.11. Lay off the midchord line f g, as shown in 
Fig. 8.11. Lay off c1 from the root chord and Cr from the tip chord in the manner 
shown in Fig. 8.11 and connect the ends by line j k'. The intersection of lines f g and 
j k defines the spanwise location of the mean aerodyhamic chord, and the length c is 
simply measured from the drawing. Alternatively, the spanwise location of the mean 
aerodynamic chord ji and its length c can be calculated as follows (Raymer, Ref. 25): 
. I 
Cr 
r----Meanae+rodyminu/·cchordL___J l 
j 
Figure 8.11 Determination of the mean aerodynamic chord. 
427 

===== PDF PAGE 442 =====
428 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
y=~(1+2A)=35.27(_!__±_!_)=1· 7.84 ftl 
6 1 +A 6 1 +0.5 [8.57] 
and 
2 ( 1 +A+ A 2 ) 2 ( 1 + 0.5 + 2.5) ~ C = 3Cr 1 +A = 3(6.65) 1 +0.5 =~ [8.58] 
Recall that the shape of the airfoil section changes along the span; we have 
chosen an NACA 23018 section at the wing root and an NACA 23012 section at the 
tip, for the reasons stated in Section 8.4.1. This, along with the taper ratio of 0.5, 
should give us a reasonable stall pattern, with separated flow occurring first near the 
root, thus maintaining reasonable aileron control in the attached flow region near the 
tip. Hence, we assume that geometric twist (washout) will not be required. Figure 
8.12 illustrates the change in airfoil shape from the root to the tip. There are several 
geometric interpolation methods for generating the shapes of the airfoils between the 
root and tip, such as section AB in Fig. 8.12. See Raymer (Ref. 25) for the lofting 
details. 
This finishes our discussion of the geometric shape of the wing. Let us now 
address its location relative to the fuselage. There are three basic vertical locations 
of the wings relative to the fuselage: (1) high wing; (2) mid-wing; (3) low wing. 
These are illustrated in Fig. 8.13. Some of the advantages and disadvantages of these 
different locations are as follows. 
High Wing Examining Fig. 8.13a, a high-wing configuration, with its low-slung 
fuselage, allows the fuselage to be placed lower to the ground. This is a distinct 
advantage for transport aircraft, because it simplifies the loading and unloading pro­
cesses. The high-wing configuration is also more stable in terms of lateral, rolling 
motion. Dihedral (wings bent upward, as shown in Fig. 8.13c) is usually incorporated 
on an airplane to enhance lateral (rolling) stability. When an airplane rolls, the lift 
vector tilts away from the vertical, and the airplane sideslips in the direction of the 
Figure 8.12 Change in airfoil shape along the span. 

===== PDF PAGE 443 =====
C HA PT E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
(a) High wing (c) Low wing 
(b)Mid wing 
Figure 8.13 Comparison of high-wing, mid-wing, and low-wing configurations. 
lowered wing. If there is dihedral, the extra component of flow velocity due to the 
sideslipping motion creates an increased lift on the lowered wing, hence tending to 
restore the wings to the level equilibrium position-this is the essense of lateral sta­
bility. For the high-wing configuration, even with no dihedral, the extra component of 
flow velocity due to the sideslipping motion in roll creates a region of higher pressure 
in the flow interaction region between the side of the fuselage and the undersurface 
of the lowered wing in the vicinity of the wing root. This increased pressure on the 
bottom surface of the lowered wing tends to roll the wings back to the level equilib­
rium. In fact, the high-wing position can be so strongly stable in roll that it becomes 
a disadvantage, and anhedral 
(wings bent downward as shown in Fig. 8.13a) is used 
on some high-wing airplanes to partially negate this overly stable behavior in roll. 
Mid-wing The mid-wing location (Fig. 8.13b) usually provides the lowest drag of 
any of the three locations because the wing-body interference is minimized. Both the 
high- and low-wing configurations require a fillet to help decrease this interference. 
(Fillets will be described below.) A major disadvantage is structural. The bending 
moment due to the wing lift must be carried through the fuselage in some manner. For 
a high-wing or low-wing configuration, this is most simply done by an extension of 
the wing box straight through the fuselage; such an extension does not get in the way 
of the internal cargo-carrying or people-carrying space of the fuselage. However, if 
this structural arrangement were to be used for a mid-wing configuration, there could 
be an unacceptable obstruction through the middle of the fuselage. To avoid this, the 
wing bending moments can be transmitted across the fuselage by a series of heavy 
ring frames in the fuselage shell, which inordinately increases the empty weight of 
the airplane. Note that, similar to the discussion on the high-wing configuration, 
the mid-wing arrangement requires little if any dihedral; hence, Fig. 8.13b shows no 
dihedral. 
Low-wing The major advantage of the low-wing configuration is in the design of the 
landing gear. Here, the landing gear can be retracted directly into the wing box, which 
is usually one of the strongest elements of the aircraft structure. For multiengine 
429 

===== PDF PAGE 444 =====
430 
figure 8.14 
A 
P A R T 3 {II Airplane Design 
propeller-driven airplanes, the landing gear can most retract into the 
engine nacelles. However, because the fuselage some ground clearance for 
engine or propeller installation, the landing gear needs to be 
the proper height above the ground, hence adding weight. 
the low-wing configuration requires some dihedral, as shown in Fig. 8.13c. 
To minimize t.lie undesirable aerodynamic interference at 
for low- and high-wing configurations, a fillet is used. The source of this interference is 
sketched in Fig. 8.14. For simplicity, assume a constant-diameter cylindrical 
i.n the wing root region. Imagine a stream tube of the flow in the ·wing-body "·"''""·..,,., 
region; such a stream tube is shown as the shaded region in 8.14. Examine section 
A-A near the maximum thickness of the wing (Fig. The cross-sectional area 
of the stream tube is small here, wilh a consequent higher fl.ow velocity and lower 
pressure, Now examine section B-B near the trailing edge of the wing (Fig. 8.14c). 
The cross-sectional area of the stream tube is larger here, with a consequent lower flow 
velocity and higher pressure. That is, the stream tube between sections A-A and B-B 
has an adverse pressure gradient, which promotes flow separation with its attendant 
higher drag and unsteady buffeting. By filling in this region of the wing-body juncture 
with a suitably contoured surface, this adverse pressure gradient and consequent flow 
separation can be minimized. This contoured surface is called afillet. Such a fillet is 
highlighted in the two-view shown in Fig. 8.15. For the mid-wing configuration, the 
wing root joins the fuselage at the 90° location around the cylindrical cross section, 
which· geometrically minimizes the change in the stream tube area at the juncture. 
For this reason, mid-wing configurations are frequently designed without a fillet. 
In light of all the above considerations, we choose a low-wing configuration, 
mainly due to the structural and landing gear considerations. We will employ a fillet 
with this configuration. 
B 
(a) (IJ) Section A-A (c) Section B B 
Expanding cross·seclional area of a stream tube al the wing-body juncture of a 
airplane. 

===== PDF PAGE 445 =====
Figure 8.15 
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
Elevator-
Vertical 
stabilizer 
Propeller 
I 
Nacelle section 
\Wing flap 
under wing aileron 
Fuselage 
Two-view of the Douglas DC-3, showing the fillet (shaded region) al the wing-body 
juncture. 
8.6.3 Fuselage Configuration 
The fuselage must be large enough to contain the engine in the nose, the pilot and 
five passengers in the cabin, the baggage, and the fuel if it is decided to store it in the 
fuselage. Let us first examine the question of where to put the fuel. For enhanced 
safety to the occupants, it is extremely desirable to store the fuel in the wings rather 
than the fuselage. Also, with the fuel storage in the wings, the shift in the airplane's 
center of gravity as fuel is consumed is usually much less than if fuel were stored 
in the fuselage. Is our wing large enough, with enough internal volume, to hold the 
431 

===== PDF PAGE 446 =====
P A R T 3 111 Airplane Design 
fuel? We need a fuel tru1t\ capacity of 145.4 gal. One gallon occupies 231 , or 
0.134 ft3 . Thus, our fuel tank must have a volume of (0.134)(145.4) = 19.4 ft3 . Let 
us assume that the internal wing structure includes a front spar located at 12% of the 
chord from the leading edge, and a rear spar located at 60% from the leading edge; 
this is shown on the wing planview in Fig. 8.16. A trapezoidal 0.8 ft high, with 
a base of dimensions 3.27 ft, 2.9 ft, and 3.93 ft, as shown in the planview in Fig. 8.16, 
will have a volume of 9. 7 ft3 ; wit.11 a tank of equal volume in the other wing, t_l-ie total 
capacity will be the required 19.4 ft3. As shown in Fig. 8.16, this tank will fit nicely 
into the wing. Hence, we will not store the fuel within the interior of the fuselage; 
rather, we will place it in the wing, as shown in Fig. 8.16. 
To size the fuselage, we recall that the engine size was given in Section 8.6. l; the 
length, width, and height of the engine are4.43, 2.91, and 2.037 ft, respectively. The 
layout shown in Fig. 8.17 is a fuselage where the engine fits e~ily into the forward 
portion; the engine is shaded for emphasis. The passenger compartment is sized for 
six people. Using guidance from Raymer (Ref. 25), the seat size is chosen as follows: 
width, 1.67 ft; back height, 2.7 ft; pitch (distance between the backs of two seats, 
one directly ahead of the other), 3.0 ft. The resulting seat arrangement is shown in 
Fig. 
8.17. Here, the side view and top view of a candidate fuselage, Fig. 8.17a and 
b, respectively, are shown that contain both the heavy engine and the people and 
payload. T'ne engine, represented by the dark, shaded regions in Fig. 8.17, fits into 
the nose. The dual rows of three seats, a total of 9 ft long, are also shown in Fig. 8.17. 
The width and depth of the fuselage as shown in sections A-A and B-B are dictated 
by the engine size and passenger cabin, respectively. There is some art in the fairing 
in of the rest of the fuselage. We have drawn a fuselage that gently reduces to a zero 
Root airfoil section 
+ a:--1::.:: j0.8ft 
---- 6.65 ft ------I 
Plan view 
Front spar location 
------------l7.64ft ---------~ 
Figure 8.16 Fuel kmk location in !he wing. 

===== PDF PAGE 447 =====
figure 8.17 
t 
3.6 ft 
i 
C H A P T E R 8 e Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
I 
LA I 
LB 
(a) Side view 
--- 9 ft __ _,., 
(b) Top view 
Baggage 
compartment 
0
5ftl 
·ED 
(c) Section A-A (d) Section B-B 
Fuselage configuration. 
cross section at the back end, with enough room for a baggage compartment Caution 
must be taken not to taper the back section of the fuselage at too large an angle, or 
else flow separation will occur. For subsonic airplanes, the taper angle should be no 
larger than about 15°. Also, the length of the fuselage behind the center of gravity 
should be long enough to provide a sufficient moment arm for both the horizontal and 
vertical tails. At this stage of our design, we have not yet determined the location of 
the center of gravity or the tail moment arm. These considerations are discussed in 
the next section. 
8.6.4 Center~of ~G:ravity Location: Fi:rst Estimate 
The major weight components for which we have some idea of their location are the 
engine, the passengers and pilot, and the baggage. Using this information, we can 
make a very preliminary estimate of the location of the center of gravity, hereafter 
denoted by e.g. The tail, fuselage, and also contribute to the e.g. location; 
however, as yet we do not know the size and location of the vertical and horizontal 
tails. We can take into account the wing and fuselage, but again in only an approximate 
fashion, as we will see. 
433 

===== PDF PAGE 448 =====
434 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
The weights of the engine, people, and baggage are shown in Fig. 8.18, along 
with the locations of their respective individual e.g. locations measured relative to 
the nose of the airplane, just behind the spinner. The effective e.g. of these three 
weights, located by i in Fig. 8.18, is calculated by summing moments about the nose 
and dividing by the sum of the weights. The result is 
(2.7)(765.8) + 10.1 (1,020) + 19.6(120) 14,722 
i = 765.8 + 1,020 + 120 = 1,905.8 = 7·72 ft 
In the above calculation, the weight of the installed engine is taken as 1.4 times the 
given dry weight of 547 lb, as suggested by Raymer (Ref. 25); hence the installed 
engine weight is taken as 765.8 lb. 
Usual design procedure calls for locating the wing relative to the fuselage such 
that the mean aerodynamic center of the wing is close to the e.g. of the airplane. 
(Indeed, for static longitudinal stability, the aerodynamic center of the airplane, also 
called the neutral point, should be located behind the e.g. of the airplane.) To account 
for the weight of the wing at this stage of our calculation, we assume that the mean 
aerodynamic center of the wing is placed at the e.g. location calculated above; that 
is, place the mean aerodynamic center at i = 7. 72 ft. (Later in the design process, 
the wing will be relocated to ensure that the aerodynamic center of the airplane is 
behind the center of gravity.) The geometry of the mean aerodynamic chord, the mean 
aerodynamic center, and the wing e.g. location are shown in Fig. 8.19. Raymer (Ref. 
25) suggests that we estimate the weight of the wing by multiplying the planform area 
by2.5;hence Wwing = 2.5(176) = 440 lb. Wealsoassumethatthe wing aerodynamic 
center is 25% of the mean aerodynamic chord from the leading edge, and that the 
wing center of gravity is at 40% qf the mean aerodynamic chord. These points are 
I '4•--------25.9ft--------
People 
2.7 ft 
765.8 lb 
1,020 lb 
IO.I ft--j 
1201b 
------19.6ft ------
x = 7.72 ft (without wing) 
x= 7.87 ft (with wing) 
Figure8.18 Sketch for the calculation of moments about the 
nose. 

===== PDF PAGE 449 =====
I 
6.65 ft 
Figure S.19 
C 
H A P T E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
i 0.74 ft 
t 
!.29 ft ----1 
-+! ___ ...,. m.a.c. 
0.776 ft t ~-----oe (c.g.)w 
m.a.c. - Mean aerodynamic center 
(c.g.)w- Wing center of gravity 
Wing geometry, showing locoiions of ihe moon aerodynamic cooler and wing 
center of gravi,y. 
J 
located in Fig. 8.19, using the above assumptions. With this, a new center-of-gravity 
location for the airplane, including the weight of the wing, can be estimated by adding 
to our earlier calculation the weight of the wing, 440 lb, acting through the moment 
arm (7.72 + 0.776). The resuJ.t is 
i = 14,722 + {440)(7.72 + 0.776) = 18,460 = 7.87 ft 
1,905.8+440 2,345.8 
Under these assumptions, note that the addition of the wing has shifted the e.g. only a 
small amrn.mtrearward, fromi = 7.72 fttoi = 7.87 ft Forthe time being, measured 
from the nose, we will assume th.e airplane e.g. to be at 
Center-of-gravity location i = 7.87 ft [1.59] 
8.6.5 Horizontal and Vertical Tan Size 
One of the most empirical and least precise aspects of the airplane design process is 
the sizing of the taiL The primary function of the horizontal tail is to provide lon­
gitudinal stability; the control surface on the horizontal. tail-the elevator-provides 
longitudinal control and trim. The primary function of the vertical tail is to provide 
directional (yawing) stability; the control surface on the vertical tail-the rudder­
provi.des directional control. T.he size of the horizontal and vertical tails must be 
sufficient to provide the necessary stability and control of the A detailed 
stability and control analysis can provide some information on tail sizing. However, 
we wm not present such an analysis here; rather, we win size the tail based on histor­
ical, empirical data. The approach is consistent with our intent to present the overall 
philosophy oft.he design process rather than get too involved 
with the design 
details. 

===== PDF PAGE 450 =====
436 P A R T 3 § Airplane Design 
We will make use of the tail volume defined as follows: 
Horizontal tail Vm = lH;~HT_ !S.60] 
Vertical tail lvTSvT 
VVT=-bS 
where Vm and VvT are the horizontal and vertical tail volume ratios, respectively, 
!HT is the horizontal distance between the e.g. of the airplane and the aerodynamic 
center of the horizontal tail, lvT is the horizontal distance between the e.g. of the 
airplane and the aerodynamic center of the vertical tail, is the planform area 
of the horizontal tail, SvT is the sideview area of the vertical tail, c is the mean 
aerodynamic chord of the wing, b is the wingspan, and S is the wing planform area. 
Based on previous single-engine general aviation airplanes, suggested values of these 
volume ratios (from Raymer, Ref. 25) are 
VHT = 0.7 
VvT = 0.04 
We will use these values for our design. 
[8.62] 
[8.63J 
The conventional location for the horizontal tail is centered on the tail end of the 
fuselage, as shown in Fig. 8.20a. There are many other possible tail configurations, 
such as the T tail (the horizontal tail mounted at the top of the vertical tail) shown in 
Fig. 8.20b, and the cruciform tail shown in Fig. 8.20c. The configuration shown in Fig. 
8.20a is called conventional because it is found on over 70% of airplanes. It is 
favored because of its low structural weight compared to the other configurations in 
Fig. 8.20 while at the same time providing reasonable stability and 
control. However, 
the horizontal tail should be sufficiently far back that at stall the wake of the horizontal 
tail does not mask the rudder on the vertical tail. For the T tail (Fig. the 
structure is heavier; the vertical tail must be strengthened to support the aerodynamic 
Conventional ·T-tail Cruciform 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure !3,20 Some different toil configurolions. 

===== PDF PAGE 451 =====
C H A P T E R 8 @ Design of a Airplane 
load and weight of the horizontal tail. On the other hand, the horizontal tail acts as an 
endplate on the vertical tail, allowing the vertical tail to experience a smaller induced 
drag and a higher lift slope; hence the aspect ratio of the vertical tail can be made 
smaller when the T tail configuration is used. Another advantage of the T tail is that 
the rudder is not blanketed at stall. Also, for a jet airplane with engines mounted 
in pods on the aft fuselage (such as the McDonnell-Douglas MD-80), the T tail is 
virtually necessary in order that the horizontal tail not be immersed in the jet exhaust. 
The cruciform tail (Fig. 8.20c) is basically a compromise between the conventional 
tail and T taiL 
There are almost a dozen other possible tail configurations; these are nicely shown 
and discussed by Raymer (Ref. 25). 
We choose to use a conventional tail configuration (Fig. 8.20a), primarily for its 
more light-weight stmcture. The length of the fuselage is 25.9 ft, as shown in Fig. 
8.18. Our design logic will be to somewhat arbitrarily locate the aerodyna..mic center 
of the horizontal tail at a distance of 25 ft from the nose, as shown in Fig. 8.21, and 
then to calculate the horizontal tail area from Eqs. and (8.62). Since the 
location of the e.g. is i = 7 .87 ft, then the moment arm from the center of gravity to 
the aerodynamic center of the horizontal tail is 
[HT= 25.0 - 7.87 = 17.13 ft 
From Eqs. (8.60) and (8.62), we have 
or 
lHTSHT --=0.7 cS 
0.7cS 
SttT= --
[8.64] 
----------- 25.9 ft-----------1 
~e.g. 
-7.87ft-
-------17.!3 ft---
I / Horizontal 
tail _.;;---
25.0ft __________ _, 
8.21 Momeni arm of !he horizontai tail. 
437 

===== PDF PAGE 452 =====
438 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
From Eq. (8.58), c = 5.17 ft. Also S = 176 ft2• Thus, from Eq. (8.65), we have for 
the planview area of the horizontal tail 
SHT = 0.7(5.17)(176) = I 37.2 ft2 I 
17.13 [8.66] 
Similarly for the vertical tail, from Eqs. (8.61) and (8.63), and recalling that b = 
35.27 ft, we have 
(0.04)bs 
SVT=---/VT 
[8.67] 
Again somewhat arbitrarily, let us place the mean aerodynamic center of the vertical 
tail 1.13 ft forward of that of the horizontal tail; that is, we assume /VT= 16 ft. From 
Eq. (8.67), we have 
sVT = (0.04)(35.27)(176) = 1 15_5 ft2 I 
16 [8.68] 
To determine the shape of the. tail surfaces, we quote from Raymer (Ref. 25) 
that "tails are little wings." Therefore, we use somewhat of the same logic that was 
employed in Section 8.6.2 in determining the shape of the wing. 
Unlike the wing, whose function is to generate lift strong enough to sustain the 
airplane in the air, the aerodynamic forces generated on the tail surfaces are relatively 
small; they need only be large enough to maintain stability and control. Also, the 
aerodynamic forces on the tail readily change directions, depending on whether the 
airplane is yawing right or left, and/or pitching up or down, also depending on which 
direction the rudder and elevator are deflected. Hence, it makes no sense to use a 
cambered airfoil for the tail sections; rather, the horizontal tail and vertical tail on 
almost all airplanes use a symmetric airfoil section. A popular choice is the NACA 
0012 airfoil. We will use the same for our design on both the horizontal and vertical 
tails. 
First, let us lay out the horizontal tail. Wings of lower aspect ratio, although 
aerodynamically less efficient, stall at higher angles of attack than wings with higher 
aspect ratio. Hence, if the horizontal tail has a lower aspect ratio than the wing, when 
the wing stalls, the tail still has some control authority. To achieve this advantage, we 
choose an aspect ratio for the horizontal tail less than that for the wing; we choose a 
value AR = 4. Also, we choose a taper ratio the same as that of the wing, A = 0.5. 
Thus, the span of the horizontal tail b, is 
b, = J(SHT)AR = J(37.2)(4) = 12.2 ft 
The tail root chord c71 is [see Eq. (8.55)] 
c _ 2SHT 2(37 .2) = 4.07 ft 
rt - (A+ l)b, (0.5 + 1)(12.2) 
The tail tip chord cu is 
Ctt = ACrt = (0.5)(4.07) = 2.035 ft 

===== PDF PAGE 453 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
The spanwise location of the mean aerodynamic chord for the horizontal tail is [see 
Eq. (8.57)] 
_ = b, 1 + 2.>.. = 12.2 ..!.±...!_ = 2.71 ft 
YHr 6 1 + A 6 1 + 0.5 
and the mean aerodynamic chord for the horizontal tail is [see Eq. (8.58)] 
_ 2 1+.>..+.>..2 2 1.75 
CHT = -C,t = -(4.07)-5 = 3.16ft 3 1+.>.. 3 1. 
This allows us to lay out the horizontal tail as shown in Fig. 8.22a. 
We now lay out the vertical tail. Typical aspect ratios for vertical tails ARVT 
range from 1.3 to 2.0, where the aspect ratio is based on the root-to-tip height hVT 
(span from tip to tip does not have any meaning here). 
Sc.g. 
(a) Plan view - fuselage and horizontal tail 
(b) Side view~ fuselage and vertical tail 
Figure 8.,22 Layout of (a) the horizontal tail and (b) the vertical tail. 
t--1 
2.04 ft 
4.07 ft 
2.14 ft 
1-l 
+ 2.14 ft 
t 
439 

===== PDF PAGE 454 =====
P A R T 3 e Airplane Design 
AR = (hVT)2 
VT S VT 
[1.69] 
We will choose an aspect ratio of 1.5. Thus, from Eq. (8.69) 
hVT = j(ARvT)SVT = /(1.5)(15.5) = 4.82 ft 
Consistent with our choice for the wing and horizontal tail, we choose a taper ratio 
of 0.5 for the vertical tail. Hence, the root chord is [ see Eq. (8.55)] 
2SvT 2(15.5) 
Crvt = = = 4.28 ft (), + l)(hVT) (0.5 + 1)(4.82) 
The tip chord is 
Ctvt = ACrvt = 0.5(4.28) = 2.14 ft 
The vertical location of the mean aerodynamic chord of the vertical tail, referenced 
to the root chord, is [see Eq. (8.57)). 
_ 2hvT l + 2).. 2(4.82) l + 1 
ZVT = ----- = ------ = 2.14ft 6 l+).. 6 1.5 
The mean aerodynamic chord for the vertical tail is [see Eq. (8.58)] 
_ 2 1+)..+).. 2 2 1.75 
CVT = -Crvt = -(4.28)-- = 3.32 ft 3 l+).. 3 1.5 
This allows us to lay out the vertical tail, as shown in Fig. 8.22b. 
8.6.6 Propeller Size 
At this stage, we are not concerned with the details of the propeller design-the 
blade shape, twist, airfoil section, etc. Indeed, for a general aviation airplane of our 
design type, the propeller would be bought off the shelf from a propeller manufacturer. 
However, for the configuration layout, we need to establish the propeller diameter, 
because that will dictate the length (hence weight) of the landing gear. 
The function of the propeller is to take the shaft power from the reciprocating 
engine and turn it into thrust power to propel the airplane forward. This is never 
accomplished without some losses, hence the propeller efficiency 1'"/pr is always less 
than unity. 
thrust power T V 00 
1'"/pr = . = -- < l shaft power P 
[8.70] 
Propeller efficiency is improved as the diameter of the propeller gets larger. The 
reason for this can be found in the discussion of propulsive efficiency in Section 3.2. 
Essentially, the larger the propeller diameter, the larger the mass flow of air processed 
by the propeller. Therefore, for the same thrust, the larger propeller requires a smaller 
flow velocity increase across the propeller disk. The smaller the increase in flow 
velocity across any propulsive device, the higher the propulsive efficiency. 

===== PDF PAGE 455 =====
C H A PT E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplan.e 
There are two practical constraints on propeller diameter: (1) The propeller tips 
must clear the ground when th.e airplane is on the ground, and (2) the propeller tip 
speed should be less than the speed of sound, or else severe compressibility effects 
will occur that ruin the propeller performance. At the sa..'TI.e time, the propeller must be 
large enough to absorb the engine power. (Imagine a small, carnival-variety pinwheel 
attached to our 360-hp engine-there would be virtually no thrust and no torque on the 
shaft, and the engine would simply "run away.") The power absorption by the propeller 
is enhanced by increasing the diamter and/or increasing the number of blades on t.h.e 
propeller. Two-blade propellers are com.rnon on general aviation aircraft. For the 
powerful combat airplanes of World War II, and the large propeller-driven commercial 
transports that immediately followed, three- and four-blade propellers were common. 
For the purpose of initial sizing, Raymer (Ref. 25) gives an empirical relation for 
propeller diameter D as a function of engine horsepower, as follows: 
Two-blade D = 22(H P) 114 
Three-blade D = 18(H P) 1/ 4 
[8.71] 
[8.72] 
where D is in inches. For our airplane design, we choose a two-blade, constant-speed, 
propeller. From Eq. (8.71), the propeller diameter is approximated as 
D = 22(360) 114 = 95.83 in = 8 ft 
Question: Is this diameter too large to avoid adverse compressibility effects at 
the tip? Let us check the tip speed. The rated RPM (revolutions per minute) for our 
chosen Textron Lycoming TIO/LTI0-540-V engine is 2,600 (Ref. 36). The tip speed 
of the propeller when the airplane is star1ding still, denoted by (i/i;p)o, is 
(Vtip)o = nnD [8.73] 
where n is the shaft revolutions per second and D is in feet. Hence, 
RPM (2,600) (Vtip)o = n 60D = rr 6() (8) = 1,089 ft/s 
When the maximum forward velocity of the airplane is vectoraHy added to (Vtip)o, 
we have the actual tip velocity relative to the airflow Vtip· 
Viip = J CV1ir)6 + V~ [8.74] 
The specified Ymax is 250 mph = 366.7 ft/s. Hence, 
i/iip = ./(1,089) 2 + (366.7)2 = l,149ft/s [S.75] 
The speed of sound at standard sea level is 1,117 ft/s; our propeller tip speed exceeds 
the speed of sound, which is not desirable. 
So we have to change our initial choice of a two-blade propeller to a three-blade 
propeller. From Eq. (8.72) 
D= = 78.4 in = 6.53 ft 

===== PDF PAGE 456 =====
P A R T 3 !ii Airplane Design 
The static tip speed is 
RPM (2,600' (Vtip)o = n: 60 D = n 6()) (6.53) = 889 fi./s 
Hence, 
Vtip =/(Yup)~+ V~ = J(889) 2 + (366.7) 2 = 962 ftls 
This is still a relatively high speed, but it is certainly more acceptable than our 
previous result. TI1erefore, for our propeller, we choose the following configuration: 
/ Three-blade D = 6.53 ft I 
We make the assumption that we can find an off-the-shelf propeller that comes 
dose to matching this size. Propeller design is an expensive process. and the nature of 
our airplane seems not to warrant the expense of designing a new Indeed, 
if we cannot find an existing propeller that satisfies our needs, then the propeller 
becomes a design constraint itself, and in subsequent iterations of our conceptual 
design process, the airplane will have to be sized to allow the use of an existing 
propeller. For example, if the takeoff gross weight of our airplane W0 were reduced, 
the power requirement would be reduced, and hence a smaller engine would be needed. 
In turn, from Eqs. (8. 71) and (8. 72), the required propeller diameter would be reduced, 
possibly fitting more closely an existing, off-the-shelf item. Such a process as just 
described is an example of the type of constant compromising that is inherent in 
airplane design. 
8.6.7 Landing Gear, and Wing Pia.cement 
In Section 8.4.2, relative to our discussion on landing distance and how it affects W / S, 
we made the decision to use a tA-icyde landing gear for our design" This configuration 
is illustrated in Fig. 8.23; here, the side view is shown, and the "footprint" of the wheels 
on the ground is sketched above the side view. An advantage of tricycle landiilg gear 
----- ----- --- - ----- -- ----- -------.... 
(a) Tricycle landing gear (b) Tail dragger (c) Bicycle landing gear 
Some common landing gear configurations: side view and, above each side view, 
!he landing gear (a) ioil dragger; (11:) 

===== PDF PAGE 457 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
is that the cabin floor for passengers and cargo is horizontal when the airplane is 
on the ground. Also, forward visibility is improved on the ground for the pilot. The 
tricycle landing gear requires that the e.g. of the airplane be ahead of the main wheels, 
as shown in Fig. 8.23, and this enhances stability during the ground roll, allowing the 
airplane to "crab" into a cross-wing; that is, the fuselage does not have to be aligned 
parallel to the runway. There are numerous other possible gear configurations (see 
Raymer, Ref. 25); two of the more cornrnon arrangements are sketched in Fig. 8.23b 
and c. The tail dragger (Fi~ 8.23b) was the most conventional configuration during 
the period from 1909 to 1945. Because the fuselage of the tail dragger is inclined 
on the ground, the propeller clearance is greater. Also, during the takeoff ground 
run, the wing can create more lift because it is already naturally at a higher angle of 
attack. For this configuration, the main wheels must be ahead of the e.g., as shown in 
Fig. 8.23b. This is an inherently unstable configuration during the ground roll; if the 
airplane (for whatever reason) starts to turn during the ground roll, the e.g. tends to 
swing around, causing the turn to get tighter. This can end up in a dangerous ground 
loop. To avoid such an event, the pilot must keep the airplane always aligned with 
the runway, constantly manipulating the rudder pedals. The bicycle landing gear, 
illustrated in Fig. 8.23c, is useful for high-wing airplanes. However, to prevent the 
airplane from tipping over on the ground, lightweight outrigger wheels are required 
near each wing tip. 
We choose the tricycle configuration shown in Fig. 8.23a. Landing gear design is 
a specialty by itself-indeed, there exist complete books just on the design oflanding 
gear, such as Refs. 56 and 57. Raymer (Ref. 25) devotes a complete chapter to the 
subject, oriented to the conceptual design phase. We will treat the subject here only 
to the extent of determining the length of the landing gear (struts plus wheels) and 
the wheel size for our airplane. 
The landing gear should be long enough to give the propeller tip at least 9-in 
clearance above the ground. We choose a clearance of 1 ft. Since the propeller 
diameter is 6.53 ft, the radius is 3.265 ft. This places the spinner centerline 4.265 ft 
above the ground, as shown in Fig. 8.24. The landing gear needs to be designed to 
provide this height above the ground: 
7.87ft---J 
Figure 8.24 Placement of the wing. 
443 

===== PDF PAGE 458 =====
444 P A ~ T 3 • Airplane Design 
At this stage we need to estimate the size of the tires. However, the tire size 
depends on the load carried by each tire. To calculate how the weight of the airplane 
is distributed over the two main wheels and the nosewheel, we need to locate the 
wheels relative to the airplane's center of gravity. Since the landing gear will retract 
into the wing, this means that we have to locate the wing relative to the fuselage. So 
let us redirect our attention for a moment to the question: Where should the wing be 
located? 
This question was addressed to some extent in Section 8.6.4, where we estimated 
the location of the e.g. of the airplane. In that section, we arbitrarily placed the mean 
aerodynamic center of the wing at the location of our first estimate for the e.g., namely, 
at i = 7. 72 ft. Then, with the wing at this location, we recalculated the_ location of 
the e.g. including the weight of the wing; the result was i = 7.87 ft, which is the 
e.g. location shown in Fig. 8.24. This location of the wing was preliminary; it was 
adopted only for the purpose of obtaining an approximation for the airplane's e.g. 
location. We are free to change the location of the wing at this stage in our iterative 
design process. We do so based on the following argument. 
From considerations of longitudinal stability, the aerodynamic center of the air­
plane must lie behind the airplane's center of gravity. The aerodynamic center of 
the airplane is also called the neutral point for the airplane; the neutral point is, by 
definition, that location of the airplane's e.g. that would result in the pitching moment 
about the e.g. being independent of angle of attack. We have not discussed the subject 
of stability and control in this book simply because of a lack of space. However, all 
we need here is just the basic idea of longitudinal stability. Indeed, reference is made 
to the introductory discussion in chapter 7 of Ref. 3. There, the following relation 
was given between the location of the aerodynamic center of the wing body Xacwb and 
the location of the neutral point Xn as 
[8.76] 
where VHT is the horizontal tail volume ratio, defined by Eq. (8.60), and a1 and a are 
the lift slopes for the horizontal tail and the complete airplane, respectively. In Eq. 
(8.76), the influence of the downwash angle behind the wing and ahead of the tail is 
neglected. Furthermore, the static margin is defined as 
. . Xn -X 
Static margm = --­c [8.77] 
where i is the location of the airplane's e.g. and c is the wing mean aerodynamic 
chord. For conventional general aviation airplanes, the static margin should be on the 
order of 5% to 10%. Let us assume the 10% value for our airplane: 
X -i Static margin = _n ___ = 0.1 [8.78] 
C 
Using i = 7.87 ft and c = 5.17 ft as obtained earlier, we find from Eq. (8.78) that 
Xn = O.lc + i = 0.1(5.17) + 7.87 = 8.387 ft 

===== PDF PAGE 459 =====
C H A P T E R 8 ® Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
In Eq. (8.76), we will assume for simplicity that the aerodynamic center of the wing­
body (wing-fuselage) combination is the same as the aerodynamic center of the wing 
Xacwb = (Xac)wing· Also, we assume for simplicity that the lift slope of the tail and 
that for the whole airplane are essentially the same, or a1 =a. Thus, from Eq. (8.76), 
we obtain for the longitudinal position of the wing aerodyamic center, recalling from 
Eq. (8.62) that 
= Xn - VHT = 8.387 - 0.7 = 7.69 ft [8.79J 
Hence, we will locate the wing such that its mean aerodynamic center is 7.69 ft 
behind the nose of the airplane. This location is shown in Fig. 8.24. Furthermore, 
from the wing layout in Fig. 8.19, this places the leading edge of the root chord at x = 
7.69 - 1.29 - 0.74 = 5.66 ft, also shown in Fig. 8.24. 
With the placement of the wing now established, we return to our consideration 
of the size and location of the landing gear. For structural and space reasons, we 
will locate the main gear at the center of the wing. As shown in Fig. 8.24, the root 
leading edge is at x = 5.66 ft. Since the root chord is 6.65 ft, then lhe location of 
the center of the wing is at Xe = 5.66 + 6.65/2 = 8.99 ft. This is shown in Fig. 
8.25. The main landing gear is located 8.99 ft behind the nose of the airplane. Let us 
locate the nosewheel so that it can be conveniently foided rearward and upward into 
the fuselage. Setting a nosewheel location of 2.25 ft, as shown in Fig. 8.25, satisfies 
this criterion. Hence, Fig. 8.25 shows the location of the landing gear. 
The size of the tires on the load distribution between the main wheels 
and the nosewheel. The loads on the tires can be calculated with the aid of Fig. 
8.26. Here, points A and B are the contact points of the nosewheel and m2in wheels, 
respectively, with the ground. The load carried by each wheel is represented by the 
equal and opposite forces exerted by the ground on the wheel (the tire). And FN and 
FM are these forces on the nosewheel and main wheels, respectively. (Note that FM 
is the combined load on the two main wheels; the load on each main wheel is FM /2.) 
i 
r---------8.99 
8.25 Location of the ge:..ar. 

===== PDF PAGE 460 =====
P 'A R T 3 e Airplane Design 
A 
Figure 8.26 
Ground 
B 
Force diagram for oblaining !he load 
distribution among !he tires. 
The takeoff gross weight W0 acts through the center of gravity. The distance between 
the. line of action of F N and the e.g. is x 1; the distance between the line of action 
of FM and the e.g. is x2. The distance between FN and FM is X3 = x1 + x2. Taking 
moments about point A, we have 
or 
Taking moments about point B, we have 
or 
FNX3 = Wox2 
Wox2 FN=-­
X3 
[USO] 
Equations (8.80) and (8.81) give the forces carried by the main wheels and the nose­
wheel, respectively. Comparing Figs. 8.25 and 8.26, we find that, for our airplane, 
X3 = 8.99 - 2.25 = 6.74 ft 
Xi = 7.87 - 2.25 = 5.62 ft 
X2 = X3 - Xi = 6.74 - 5.62 = 1.12 ft 
Substituting these values into Eqs. (8.80) and (8.81), we obtain 
FM = Wox1 = (5, 158)(5.62) = 4,30l lb 
X3 6.74 

===== PDF PAGE 461 =====
C H A P T E R 8 ® Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
and 
F N = Wox2 = (5, 158)(1.12) = 857 lb 
X3 6.74 
Hence, the load on the nosewheel is 857 lb, and the load on each main wheel is 
FM/2 = 4,301/2 = 2,150.5 lb. 
With this information, the tire sizes can be estimated. Raymer (Ref. 25) gives 
empirically determined relations for wheel diameter and width in terms of the load 
on each tire. 
Wheel diameter or width (in)= A W 8 
where, for general aviation airplanes, the values of A and B are as follows: 
Wheel diameter (in) 
Wheel width (in) 
A B 
l.51 
0.715 
0.349 
0.312 
For our design, from Eq. (8.82) we have 
Main wheels: 
( F )B (4 301 )0.349 
Diameter= A\ t = 1.51 -'-2- = 21.98 in 
Width= A (Ft) 
8 
= 0.715 ( 4,~0l) o.
312 
= 7.84 in 
Nosewheel: 
Diameter= AFt = 1.51(857)°-349 = 15.94 in 
Width= AF.i = 0.715(857)°-312 = 5.88 in 
[8.82] 
As in the case of the propeller, we must use off-the-shelf tires from the manufacturers. 
From a tire catalog, we would choose the tires that most closely match the sizes 
calculated above. 
Before we end this section, please note a detail that we did not take into account, 
namely, the shift in the position of the center of gravity. In all our previous calcula­
tions, we assumed a fixed e.g. location. However, due to changes in the distribution 
of payload and fuel during the flight, the e.g. shifts position. In a more detailed 
analysis, we would estimate the most forward and rearward positions to be expected 
for the center of gravity. Among other things, this would affect the calculation of 
the maximum static loads carried by the wheels. In Eq. (8.80) for the load on the 
main wheels, x1 would correspond to the most rearward position of the e.g.; and in 
Eq. (8.81) for the load on the nosewheel, x2 would correspond to the most forward 
position of the center of gravity. However, we will not account for this effect in our 
calculations here. 
447 

===== PDF PAGE 462 =====
P A R T 3 s Airplane Design 
8.6.8 The Resulting Layout 
AH aspects of Section 8.6 have been aimed at achieving the configuration layout­
a drawing of our first iteration for the shape and size of the airplane. Our various 
considerations-the wing's size, shape, and placement relative to the fuselage; the 
tail's size and placement; etc.-lead to the configuration shown in Fig. 8.27--our first 
configuration layout. 
1-· ----35.27ft----, 
4.28 fl 
~I _...J 
Figure 8.27 iteration. 
1~ 
I 
12.2 ft 
T 
_i I 
9.09 ft 
1 

===== PDF PAGE 463 =====
C H A PT E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
In Fig. 8.27, a few additional features are shown. A wing dihedral of 5° is shown; 
this is based on previous general aviation airplane designs where the dihedral· angle 
is en the order of 5° to 7° (Ref. 25). The ailerons, flaps, elevator, and rudder are 
shown, with a width equal to 30% of the local chord, a typical width. A more detailed 
design and sizing of the control surfaces are performed during later iterations of the 
configuration layout, and are based on a control analysis that has not been discussed 
in this book; see Ref. 3 for an introductory discussion of stability and control. (In our 
effort to present the philosophy of airplane design in this book, a detailed analysis 
of control is beyond our scope.) The tentative ;:JOsition of windows and doors is also 
shown in Fig. 8.27. The main landing gear is placed 14.6 ft apart so that it will retract 
into the wing without interfering with the space for the fuel tank; the fuel tank (see 
Fig. 8.16) and the retracted landing gear are shown 
in Fig. 8.27 as dashed lines in the 
plan view. One of the functions of the configuration layout is to see whether things 
fit internally in the airplane. 
We have now completed pivot point 4 in Fig. 7.3. Let us move on to pivot point 
5-a better weight estimate. 
8.7 A BETTER WEIGHT ESTIMATE 
In Section 8.3 we made a first estimate of the gross takeoff weight W0 on the basis of 
historical data from previous airplanes. We had no other choice because at that stage 
we did not know the size and shape of our airplane design. However, with Fig. 8.27 
we now have a configuration layout with which we can attempt a component weight 
buildup--estimating the weight of the various parts of the airplane and adding them 
to obtain the total empty weight. 
Weight estimation in airplane design is critical. In most airplane companies, this 
job is carried out by specialized weight engineers, who draw from many disciplines 
such as structures, mechanical design, and statistics. Moreover, each company has its 
own established procedures and detailed formulas for estimating weights. It is well 
beyond the scope of this book to describe such detailed procedures. However, we 
will carry out a crude weight buildup that is more detailed than the weight estimation 
made in Section 8.3. This will serve to illustrate the philosophy of pivot point 5 in 
Fig. 7 .3, and it will also give us a better weight estimate with which to finish our first 
design iteration. 
Raymer (Ref. 25) gives an approximate weight buildup for a general aviation 
airplane as follov,s: 
Wing weight = 2.5Sexposed wing planform 
Horizontal tail weight = 2.0Sexposed horiz tail planform 
Vertical tail weight = 2.0Sexposed vert tail planform 
Fuselage weight = l .4Swetted area 
Landing gear Weight = 0.057 Wo 
Installed engine weight = 1.4(Engine weight) 
All else empty = 0.1 Wo 
[8.83al 
[8.83b] 
[8.83c] 
[3.83d] 
[S,83e] 
[8.83fl 
[8.83g] 
449 

===== PDF PAGE 464 =====
450 P A R T 3 8 Airplane Design 
Here all areas are in units of square feet, and all weights are in the units of pounds. Be­
cause Eqs. (8.83e) and (8.83g) involve the takeoff gross weight, which is determined 
in part by the other elements of Eq. (8.83), the use of this list of relations involves 
an iterative approach to converge on the empty weight. Let us apply Eqs. (8.83a) to 
(8.83g) to our airplane. 
The exposed planform areas of the wing and tail are the areas seen in the con­
figuration layout, Fig. 8.27, and do not include the effective additional areas that 
project into the fuselage. For example, our calculated planform area of the wing, 
S = 176 ft2 obtained in Section 8.4.2, includes that part of the wing which is pro­
jected inside the fuselage. The wing area shown in Fig. 8.19 includes the region 
covered by the fuselage; the area shown in Fig. 8.19 (since it is only one-half of 
the wing) is 176/2 = 88 ft2. In contrast, the value of Sexposed wing planfonn is less than 
176 ft2. From Figs. 8.10, 8.22, and 8.27, we obtain 
Sexposed wing planfonn = 148 ft2 
Sexposed horiz tail planfonn = 35.3 ft2 
Sexposed vert tail planfonn = 14.4 
To estimate the wetted surface area of the fuselage, let us approximate the fuselage 
shape by two cylinders and a cone, as shown in Fig. 8.28. The forward section, 
section A, is simulated by an elliptical cylinder, where the elliptical cross section 
has semimajor and semiminor axes of 4.28 and 2.93 ft, respectively. The center 
fuselage section, section B, is represented by a circular cylinder of diameter 4.28 ft. 
The rearward section, section C, is approximated by a right circular cone with a base 
diameter of 4.28 ft and an altitude of9 ft. For the purposes of this book, the simulation 
shown in Fig. 8.28 is simply a crude way of estimating the wetted surface area of 
Circular Cone 
1-6.75 ft~-ll.3 fl-----
A B 
Figure 8.28 
2.93 ft 4.28 ft 
Model fur the estimation of wetted surface area 
of the fuseiage For our airplane design. Elliptid 
cylinder, circular cyiinder, cone combination. 

===== PDF PAGE 465 =====
C HAP T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
the fuselage; practicing professional design teams have more accurate methods for 
obtaining wetted surface area. 
For section A, the surface area of the elliptical base is 11: ab = 11: ( 4.28 /2) (2.93 /2) 
= 9.85 ft2 , where a and bare the semimajor and semiminor axes, respectively. The 
surface area of the side of the cylinder is the circumference times the length of the 
side. The circumference of the elliptical base is approximately 211: J (a 2 + b2) /2 = 
2rr.j[(2.14) 2 + (l.465) 2)/2 = 11.52 ft. Hence, the surface area of the side of the 
elliptical cylinder is (11.52)(6.75) = 77.8 ft2 . The total wetted surface area of section 
A is therefore 9. 85 + 77. 8 = 87. 63 ft2• For section B, the area of the base of the circular 
cylinder is 11:d2 /4 = 11:(4.28)2 /4 = 14.39 ft2 • The exposed wetted surface area of the 
base is that outside of the intersection with section A, namely, 14.39-9 .85 = 4.54 ft2. 
The surface area of the side of the circular cylinder is 11:(4.28)(11.3) = 151.9 ft2. 
Hence the total wetted surface area of section Bis 4.54 + 151.9 = 156.5 ft2• The 
surface area of the cone designated as section C is given by 11:rJr2 + h2 where r 
is the radius of the base and h is the altitude. From Fig. 8.28, this surface area 
is rr(2.14)j(2.14)2 + (9)2 = 62.2 ft2. Finally, the total wetted surface area of the 
geometric figure in Fig. 8.28 is 
Swetted area = section A + section B + section C 
= 87.63 + 156.5 + 62.2 = 306.3 ft2 
Since~g. 8.28 represents a crude estimate for the wetted surface area of the fuselage, 
we will use for this wetted area the value of 306.3 .ft2 calculated above. 
Returning to Eqs. (8.83a) to (8.83g) and inserting the above areas, we have 
From Eq. (8.83a): 
Wing weight = 2.5(148) = 370 lb 
From Eq. (8.83b): 
Horizontal tail weight = 2.0(35.3) = 70.6 lb 
From Eq. (8.83c): 
Vertical tail weight = 2.0(14.4) = 28.8 lb 
From Eq. (8.83d): 
Fuselage weight = 1.4(306.3) = 428.8 lb 
From Eq. (8.83e): 
Landing gear weight = 0.057(5, 158) = 294 lb 
From Eq. (8.83f): 
Installed engine weight = 1.4(547) = 765.8 lb 
451 

===== PDF PAGE 466 =====
452 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
From Eq. (8.83g): 
All else empty = 0.1(5, 158) = 515.8 lb 
Total empty weight We= 2,4741b 
In Eqs. (8.83e) and (8.83g), W0 is our original estimate of 5,158 lb from Section 8.3. 
In Eq. (8.83!), the dry engine weight is 547 lb from Section 8.6.1. The gross takeoff 
weight is given by Eq. (8.1): 
Wo = Wcrew + Wpayload + Wfuel + Wempty [8.1] 
From Section 8.3, we recall that Wcrew = 170 lb, Wpayload = 970 lb, and Wfuel = 
820 lb. [Note that Wt/ Wo = 0.159 from Eq. (8.20). Hence, the value of Wt = 820 lb 
will change as W0 changes in the iterative calculation we are now carrying out.] Thus, 
from Eq. (8.1), with our weight values obtained above, we have 
Wo = W crew + Wpayload + Wt + We [8.84] 
Wo = 170 + 970 + 820 + 2,474 = 4,434 lb 
With this new value of Wo, we return to Eqs. (8.83e and g) and recalculate We, 
Landing gear weight= 0.057(4,434) = 252.7 lb 
All else empty= 0.1(4,434) = 443.4 lb 
This gives anew We= 2,360 lb. The new Wt is obtained from Wt= 0.159(4,434) = 
705 lb. In tum, from Eq. (8.1) we obtain yet another value of W0 : 
Wo = 170 + 970 + 705 + 2,360 = 4,205 lb 
We repeat this process, recalculating We, Wt, and Wo, until convergence is obtained. 
The iterative process is summarized below. 
Iteration We (lb) Wr(lb) Wo (lb) 
1 2,474 820 4,434 
2 2,360 705 4,205 
3 2,324 668.6 4,132.6 
4 2,313 657.1 4,110 
5 2,309 653.5 4,103 
6 2,308 652.4 4,100 
7 2,308 651.9 4,100 
The iteration converges to the following values: 
We= 2,308 lb Wt= 652 lb Wo = 4, 1001b 
We observe that the above weights are considerably different from the original 
values considered in our design calculations in the preceding sections. We have just 

===== PDF PAGE 467 =====
C H A P T E R 8 o Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
carried out the design philosophy associated with pivot point 5 in Fig. 7.3. Based on 
the configuration l.ayout, we have obtained a better weight estimate. Note that our 
new ratio of empty to gross weight is W, / W0 = 0.56. This is less than the value of 
0.62 chosen in Section 8.3.l based on the historical data shown in Fig. 8.2; the value 
of We/ Wo = 0.56 falls within the low side of the scatter of data points for airplanes 
with gross weights less than 
10,000 lb in Fig. 8.1. 
We now proceed to the next pivot point in Fig. 7.3, namely, a performance analysis 
using the better weight estimate obtained in the present section. 
8.8 PERFOR.l\1ANCE ANALYSIS 
The estimate of W0 = 4,100 lb obtained in Section 8.7 is lower than the initial 
estimate of W0 = 5,158 lb used for our design calculations to this point. This is 
an encouraging trend, because the airplane shown in the configuration layout in Fig. 
8.27 will have better performance with the lower W0 than we have estimated so far. 
The function of pivot point 6 in Fig. 7 .3 is to find out whether the design existing at 
pivot point 4 will meet or exceed the requirements. This is the subject of this section. 
Here we will c&rry out a performance analysis of the airplane shown in Fig. 8.27, 
using the improved weight estimates obtained from pivot point 5. We will use the 
performance analysis techniques discussed in Chapters 5 and 6. 
The updated performance parameters are 
Wing loading W = 4, lOO = 23.3 lb/ft 2 
S 176 
Power loading 
W 4,100 - = -- = 11.39 lb/hp P 360 
The aerodynamic coefficients have not been changed, by choice. In a more sophis­
ticated design experience, at this stage in the design process better estimates for 
CD,o, K, and (Cdmax would be made, using the configuration layout in Fig. 8.27. 
For simplicity, we choose not to do so here. Hence, we still assume 
CD,O = 0.017 
K = 0.075 
(CL)max = 2.34 
(L) - -14 
D max 
8.8.1 Power Required and Power Available Curves 
Since cruise is set at 20,000 ft, the power required and power available are calculated 
for an altitude of 20,000 ft. Figure 8.29 gives the variation of drag with velocity, 
and Fig. 8.30 gives the variation of horsepower required and horsepower available 

===== PDF PAGE 468 =====
454 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
800 
700 
600 
== 
500 
g 400 
300 
200 
100 
0 100 200 300 
Velocity, ft/s 
400 500 
Figure 8.29 The variation of drag due to lift, zero-lift drag, 
and total drag with velocity at 20,000 ft. W o = 
4,1001b. 
400 
300 
,_, ., 
:3: 
8. 200 
~ :i::: 
100 
0 
Figure 8.30 
HPA 
100 200 300 400 500 
Velocity, ft/s 
Horsepower required and horsepower available at 
20,000 ft. Wo = 4,100 lb. 
at 20,000 ft. The graphical construction in Fig. 8.30 predicts Vmax = 437 ft/s = 
298 mi/h. This is considerably higher than the requirements of a maximum velocity 
of 250 mi/h, as given in Section 8.2. In fact, Fig. 8.30 assumes the weight to be the 
full W0 = 4,100 lb, not the midcruise weight that is stipulated in the requirements; 
Vmax at midcruise weight would be even higher. Clearly, our airplane design exceeds 
the Vmax specification. 

===== PDF PAGE 469 =====
C H A PT E R 8 111 Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
8.8.2 Rate of CUmb 
The variation of maximum rate of climb with altitude is shown in Fig. 8.31, where 
the weight at each altitude is assumed to be W0 = 4,100 lb. At sea level, (R/ C)max = 
1,572 ft/min. This far exceeds the required (R/C)max = 1,000 ft/min. Once again, 
our airplane design exceeds specification. 
At 18,000 ft, there is a kink in the rate-of-climb curve. This is due to the engine's 
being supercharged to sea-level density as high as 18,000 ft, and then above 18,000 ft 
the engine power decreases proportionately with ambient density. From Fig. 8.31, 
we obtain a graphical solution for the absolute and service ceilings as 33,600 and 
32,400 ft, respectively. This far exceeds the requirement for a ceiling of 25,000 ft 
given in Section 8.2. 
From the variation of (R/C)max with altitude shown in Fig. 8.31, the time to 
climb is calculated as described in Section 5.12. The results show that the time to 
climb to 20,000 ft is 14.02 min. 
8.8.3 Range 
Since we are assuming the same aerodynamic characteristics for the airplane in Fig. 
8.27 as we have used during the earlier part of this chapter, the range also stays the 
same. For a range of 1,200 mi, W1/W0 = 0.159 as calculated in Section 8.3.2. 
However, because of the lighter gross weight, W f is smaller. We have already calcu­
lated the new fuel weight in Section 8.7 to be 652 lb, down from our first estimate of 
820 lb. Hence, our airplane design meets the specification for a range of 1,200 mi, 
and it does this with a smaller fuel load than had previously been calculated. 
40 
36 _______ Absolute ceiling 
32 - - - -
- - Service ceiling 
figure 8.31 
8 
4 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 
Maximum rate of climb, ft/minx 10-2 
Maximum rate of climb as a function of 
altitude. W o = 4,100 lb. 
455 

===== PDF PAGE 470 =====
456 PART 3 @ Design 
S.8.4 StaUing Speed 
The value of (Cdmax = 2.34 obtained in Section 8.4.1 remains unchanged since we 
are assuming the same aerodynamic characteristics as utilized earlier. However, be­
cause W / S is now different, the stalling velocity will change from its earlier specified 
value. Specifically, from (5.67), we have 
Hence,the specification in Section 8.2 that the stalling speed be 70 mi/h or less 
is dearly satisfied. 
8.8.5 Landing Distance 
As in Section 8.4.2, we will again adopt an approach angle Ba = 3°. The average 
velocity during flare is = 1.23 Vstall = (l .5) = 112.5 ft/s. From Eq. 
(6.107), the flight path radius during flare is 
Vj (112.5) 2 
R = - = = l, 965 ft 0.2g (0.02)(32.2) 
From Eq. (6.106), the flare height is given 
= R(l - cos ea) = 1,965(1 - cos = 2.69 ft 
From Eq. (6J08), the approach distance to dear a 50-ft obstacle is 
50- ht 
Sa= 
Tan ea 
50- 2.69 ---- = 902.7 ft Tan 3° 
The flare distances f is given by Eq. 
s1 = R sin Ba = 1,965 sin 3° = 102.8 ft 
The ground roll is approximated by (8.28). 
2 W I 
Sg=}N -- +-----Poo S (Cdmax · 
[8.28] 
where j = l. N = 3 s, and /J.,r = 0.4. Using the updated value of 
23.3 , Eq. (8.28) 
Hence, 
Total landing distance= Sa+ Sj + s8 = 902.7 + 102.8 + 745.9 = 1 1,751 ft 
This is well within the specified landing distance of ft in Section 8.2. 

===== PDF PAGE 471 =====
C HA PT E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
8.8.6 Takeoff Distance 
An estimate of the ground roll can be obtained from Eq. (6.95): 
l.21(W/S) 
Sg = gpoo(Cdmax(T I W) 
[6.95] 
In Eq. (6.95), an average value of T / W during takeoff is that value at V00 = 0.7Vw, 
where VLo = 1.1 Ystall· Hence, T /Wis evaluated at a velocity of 
V00 = 0.7Vw = 0.77Vstall = 0.77(91.5) = 70.4 ft/s 
Since the power available is, from Eq. (3.13), 
PA = T/prP = TA Voo 
we have (recalling HP = 360, and 550 ft-lb/sis 1 hp) 
_ T/prP _ (0.8)(360)(550) _ 2 ,; TA - -- - - ,2~0lb V00 70.4 
Hence, 
( T) 2,250 
W 0.7Vw = 4, 100 = 0.549 
Returning to Eq. (6.95), and recalling that ( C L)max = 1.98 with the flaps in the takeoff 
position, and W / S = 23 .3 lb/ft2 , we have 
l.2l(W/S) 1.21(23.3) 
Sg = = = 338.9 ft gpoo ( C dmax (T / W) (32.2)(0.002377) ( 1.98) (0.549) 
To obtain the distance covered while airborne to clear an obstacle, we first cal­
culate the flight pat...li. radius from Eq. (6.98). 
6.96CVstan)2 (6.96)(91.5)2 R = = 1,810ft 
g 32.2 
From Eq. (6.99), the included flight path angle is 
1 ( hoB) eoB = Cos- 1 - R [6.99] 
where ho8 is the obstacle height, h08 = 50 ft. 
J ( 50 ) 0 
eoB = Cos- 1 - l,SlO = 13.5 
From Eq. (6.100), the airborne distance is 
Sa= R sin8oB = 1,810sin 13.5° = 422.5 ft 
The total takeoff distance is then 
Takeoff distance= Sg + Sa = 338.9 + 422.5 = I 761.4 ft 
This is far less than the specified takeoff distance of 2,500 ft as stated in Section 8.2. 
457 

===== PDF PAGE 472 =====
458 PART 3 ~ 
8.8.7 Interim Summary 
We have just finished a performance analysis of the airplane shown in the configuration 
layout in Fig. 8.27. We have now completed pivot 6 in Fig. 7.3. Question: 
Does our airplane design meet or exceed the requirements? Answer: Emphatically 
yes. In every respect, the design outperforms the in some cases 
a considerable margin. An obvious reason for this excellent performance is the 
considerably reduced gross weight of lb compared to the original estimate of 
5,158 lb. Since the engine was originally sized to meet the specifications with the 
larger weight, the lighter airplane has a smaller power loading, namely 11.39 
compared to the earlier value of 14.3 lb/hp. Our lighter is simply a "hot" 
airplane compared to the earlier stage of our design. For this reason, returning to Fig. 
7.3, there is no need to iterate the design to obtain better perforrnance. 
However, moving to pivot point 7 in Fig. 7.3, we ask the question: Is it the 
best design? We do not know the answer to this question without carrying out the 
optiwization study called for by pivot point 7. But it is virtually certain that we 
do not have the best design for the specifications given in Section 8.2. our 
airplane appears to be greatly overdesigned for the given specifications. In particular, 
with the lighter gross weight of 4,100 lb, we can choose a less powerfui, more light 
weight engine and still meet the specifications. In such a case, the airplane will be 
less expensive, and hence a "better" design. So pivot 7 is absolutely critical. 
The performance parameter space needs to be examined ( various choices of W / S, 
W / P, etc.) in order to find the best airplane that will meet the specifications. To 
carry out such an optimization here is beyond our scope. However, in terms of the 
design philosophy discussed in Chapter 7, you need to appreciate the importance of 
pivot point 7. 
8.9 SUMMARY 
The purpose of this chapter has been to illustrate the design philosophy discussed 
in Chapter 7, especially as highlighted in Fig. 7.3. We chose to design a propeller­
driven airplane in this chapter. However, the general philosophy of design is the same, 
whatever type of airplane is considered-propeller-driven, jet-powered, subsonic, or 
supersonic. Since Chapters 5 and 6 used a turbofan-powered airplane as an example, 
this chapter provides a balance 
by dealing with a propeller-driven airplane. 
We end this chapter with two short design case histories of perhaps the most 
important propeller-driven airplanes ever designed-the 1903 Flyer and the 
Douglas DC-3 from the 1930s. One of the purposes of these case histories is to 
illustrate the role of the design philosophy as constructed in 7 in the design 
of these historic aircraft. 
8.10 DESIGN CASE STUDY: THE WRIGHT FLYER 
This section is an adjunct to Section 1.2.2, where the design features of the Wright 
Flyer are summarized and where the attributes of Wilbur and Orville as the first 

===== PDF PAGE 473 =====
C H A P T E R 8 ® Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
true aeronautical engineers are highlighted. In this section, we reexamine the design 
of the Wright Flyer relative to the design philosophy discussed in Chapter 7, and 
we address the question of how closely the Wright brothers followed the intellectual 
pivot points listed in Fig. 7 .3. Before you continue, please review Section l.2.2 and 
Fig. 7.3. 
There were no customer requirements specified for the Wright Flyer. There 
were only the requirements set by the Wright brothers themselves, namely, to design 
a powered flying machine that would lift a human being off the ground and fly through 
the air without loss of speed in a fully controlled fashion. For the Wright brothers, 
this was intellectual pivot point 1 in Fig. 7.3. 
We have stated earlier that aircraft design is more often evolutionary than rev­
olutionary. The design of the Wright Flyer was both. Let us explain. The Wrights 
did not operate in a vacuum. They inherited the bulk of aeronautical progress that 
occurred during the nineteenth century, including the work of Lilienthal, Langley, 
and Chanute 
(see Chapter 1). Jakab states in Ref. 1: 
An important beginning step of the Wrights' engineering approach to human flight 
was to become acquainted with the work of previous experimenters. By the time the 
brothers began their study of flight at the close of the nineteenth century, a growing 
community of aeronautical experimenters had emerged. As the .field slowly orga­
nized, publication and dissemination of aeronautical research grew more widespread. 
Through contact with several key individuals and sources of information, the broth­
ers were able to digest the work of generations of experimenters. Familiarization 
with these prior developments aided the Wrights in defining the basic obstacles to 
human flight and outlining their initial approach to the problem. Their literature 
search enabled them to take advantage of already established principles and to avoid 
dead-end paths pursued by others. 
In many respects, the Wright Flyer evolved from this earlier work. Most likely, if 
the first successful airplane had not been designed and flown by the Wrights in 1903, 
someone else would have done it within the decade. Moreover, the Wrights began 
with three glider designs, the first two of which in 1900 and 1901 were based almost 
entirely on the existing bulk of aeronautical knowledge. These two glider designs 
were not successful, and the Wrights ultimately blamed the failure on errors in the 
existing data, particularly on a table of normal and axial force coefficients generated 
by Lilienthal. However, I have shown in Ref. 8 that the Wrights made three distinct 
errors in the interpretation of the Lilienthal tables which account for the failure of 
their 1900 and 1901 gliders. Nevertheless, the Wrights made the decision in the fall 
of 1902 to throw away the existing data and generate their own. To this end, they 
built a small wind tunnel and tested over a hundred different wing and airfoil shapes, 
finding out for themselves what constituted "good aerodynarnics" for their purposes. 
On the basis of their wind tunnel results, they designed a new glider which in 1902 
flew beautifully. The next step, in 1903, was the design of a powered machine-the 
Flyer. Hence, the Wright indirectly inherited some of the aeronautical 
features developed in the nineteenth century and directly inherited the knowledge 
generated with the Wrights' 1902 glider. In these respects, the design of the Wright 
can be considered evolutionary. 
However, the Wright Flyer was also revolutionary in the sense that it worked. It 
was the first flying machine to successfully whereas all prior attempts by other 
459 

===== PDF PAGE 474 =====
460 P A R T 3 o Airplane Design 
inventors had met with failure. And the Wrights' design appr_oach was unique for that 
time, which adds to the revolutionary nature of the Wright Flyer. This uniqueness is 
nicely caught by Jakab (Ref. 
The Wrights' persistent attention to the overall goal of a completely successful flying 
machine during every phase of the work was also an important aspect of their inventive 
method. Each experimental glider and powered airplane they built, as well as every 
individual element of each aircraft, was seen and valued in terms of the ultimate aim of 
building a practical aircraft. The Wrights' approach was distinct among aeronautical 
experimenters in that they 
believed no specific component to be more important than 
any other. They recognized that every aspect of a workable flying machine must be 
designed to coordinate with every other. No matter how advanced the wing, without 
an adequate control system, an aircraft will not fly. No matter how effective the 
control system, without a sound structural design to carr; the flight loads, an aircraft 
will not fly. And so on. Wilbur and Orville understood that an airplane is not a single 
device, but a series of discrete mechanical and structural entities, that, when working 
in proper unison, resulted in a machine capable of flight. Moreoever, realizing that 
the pilot is a part of this system, they devoted as much attention to learning to fly 
their aircraft as they did in designing and building them. 
For all these reasons, the Wright Flyer was revolutionary. 
For the Wright Flyer, the intellectual process embodied in pivot points 2 and 3 
in Fig. 7.3 was a combination of experience with the 1902 glider and new, innovative 
thinking by the Wrights. First, consider the estimation of weight and wing surface 
area (hence wing loading W / S). The 1901 glider, with pilot, weighed 240 lb and 
had a wing area of 290 ft2• Although the 1902 glider was redesigned with different 
aerodynamics, for their calculations the Wrights kept the weight essentially the same 
as that of the 1901 glider, namely 240 lb. Their wind tunnel tests had identified a 
wing with aspect ratio 6, curvature (camber) of fo, and a parabolic airfoil shape as 
the most efficient aerodynamic shape. Moreover, the maximum lift-to-drag ratio for 
this wing was 
achieved with an angle of attack of 5°. This is perhaps one reason 
why the Wrights felt that a "proper" range of flight angle of attack was 4° to 8°, as 
stated by Wilbur in a paper delivered to the Society of Western Engineers in Chicago 
on June 24, 1903. (This was Wilbur's second paper to the Society, the first being 
delivered on September 18, 1901.) The Wrights calculated lift in pounds, using the 
formula 
[8.35] 
where k is Smeaton's coefficient, measured by the Wrights to be 0.0033 (see Ref. 8 
for the role of Smeaton's coefficient in history), Sis the wing area in square feet, Vis 
velocity in miles per hour, and CL is their measured value for the lift coefficient. At 
the lowest angle of attack deemed proper, namely, 4°, their measured lift coefficient 
was 0.433 (interpolated from their tables in Ref. 58). Thus, from Eq. (8.85), putting 
L = W, we have for the calculated wing loading 
w 2 
S = kV CL [8.86] 

===== PDF PAGE 475 =====
C H A P T E R 8 ® Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
The Wrights considered a wind of25 mi/h to be an average for the region around Kill 
Devil Hills. Hence, from Eq. (8.86), we obtain 
w - = 0.0033(25) 2 (0.433) = 0.89 lb/ft2 
s 
When it was constructed, the 1902 glider weighed about 260 lb including the 
pilot and had a total wing area of 305 . The resulting wing loading was 0.85 lb/ft2 , 
very close to (but slightly more conservative the calculated design value of 
0.89 lb/ft2 . Finally, these conditions for the 1902 glider were translated to the design 
characteristics for the 1903 Wright Flyer. When the began to design their 
powered machine, they allotted no more than 180 lb for the weight of the engine, 
which they felt must also produce a minimum of 8 to 9 brake horsepower (bhp). 
(These are specifications stated by the Wrights in their letters that were mailed to 
a number of engine manufacturers in December 1902. Nobody could meet these 
specifications, so Orville along with Charlie Taylor, a mechanic at their bicycle shop, 
took on the design and fabrication of the engine themselves.) With the increased 
weight due to the engine and propellers, the new flying machine had to be larger than 
their 1902 glider, which increased the weight even more. They converged on a total 
estimated design gross weight of 625 lb. With they had executed pivot point 2 
in Fig. 7.3. To obtain the wing loading (hence wing area), Eq. (8.86) was used. The 
actual design velocity used by the Wrights for the machine cannot be found in their 
correspondence (at least not by this author). However, it is most likely that they would 
have designed for 30 mi/h, which would allow them to make demonstrable forward 
progress over the ground in the face of the assumed average 25 mi/h headwinds at Kill 
Devil Hills. From Eq. (8.86) with V = 30 mi/h, and using the same lift coefficient of 
0.433 which led to their successful 1902 glider design, the resulting wing loading is 
: = (0.0033)(30) 2 (0.433) = 1.29 lb/ft2 
The Wrights built the Wright Flyer with a wing area of 510 ft2, which gives a design 
wing loading of 1.23 lb/ft2, very close to the above result. With this calculation, the 
Wrights were carrying out an important aspect of pivot point 3 in Fig. 7.3. 
Another design calculation was for the thrust required, which is equal to the drag. 
The Wrights made a rather detailed drag breakdown for their machine, calculating 
what at that time was called "head resistance." The details are too lengthy to discuss 
here; they can be pieced together from the voluminous correspondence in Ref. 58. 
The net result was a calculation of 90 lb for thrust required. This meant that the engine 
horsepower had to translate into 90 lb of thrust from the propellers. In essence, the 
design thrust-to-weight ratio was T / W = 0.144. The Wrights' propeller design was 
a masterstroke of engineering brilliance, as described in Section 1.2.2 and discussed 
in Ref. 1. In the final result, the Wrights were elated when they measured 136 lb of 
thrust from their engine/propeller combination. And a thing it was, because the 
actual fabricated weight of the Wright was slightly over 700 lb, considerably 
greater than the design figure of 625 lb. (This progressive increase in weight during 
the course of the design is a trend that has plagued most airplanes since the Wright 
461 

===== PDF PAGE 476 =====
462 P A R T 3 e Airplane Design 
Flyer.) Once again, with this thinking, the Wrights were f9llowing pivot point 3 in 
Fig. 7.3. For the design of the Wright Flyer, the Wrights were aiming at a thrust­
to-weight ratio of 0.144. What they achieved, due to the high efficiency of their 
propellers and in spite of the increase in weight. was an actual thrust-to-weight ratio 
of 0.19. (In regard to the efficiency of their propellers, the Wrights had calculated a 
value of 55% from their propeller theory; what was achieved was much higher. Later, 
in 1909, a Captain Eberhardt in Berlin made detailed measurements of the propeller 
efficiency of the Wrights' propellers used on their Type A Flyer of 1908, and found 
it to be 76%. This was by far the most efficient propeller for its day.) 
The Wrights moved on to pivot point 4-a configuration layout. Their three-view 
sketch of the Wright Flyer, drawn in pencil on brown wrapping paper, with Wilbur's 
handwriting and notations, is shown in Fig. 8.32. The original sketch, mounted on 
cardboard, is now in the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia. 
Figure 8.32 The Wright brothers' configuration layout for the 1903 Wright Flyer, drawn in 
pencil on brown wrapping paper. The notations were written by Wilbur 
Wright. The original sketch (with smudges), mounted on cardboard, is in the 
Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 

===== PDF PAGE 477 =====
C HA PT E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
The Wrights did not go through pivot points 5, 6, and 7 in Fig. 7.3-they felt 
they did not have to. They had confidence that they had designed a machine that 
would do the job, that would fly. With the conceptual design finished, the Wrights 
essentially truncated the processes of preliminary and detailed design (as defined in 
Chapter 7) by carrying out the fabrication of the machine themselves, hand-crafting 
the individual parts to their satisfaction. The rest is history, made on the sand dunes 
of Kill Devil Hills on December 17, 1903, when, indeed, their machine did fly. 
Wilbur and Orville Wright designed the first successful airplane. In so doing, 
without realizing it consciously, they followed the design philosophy discussed in 
Chapter 7. This design philosophy is basically innate. It was followed by the Wrights 
because it was simply the natural approach to take. However, the Wrights were 
consummate aeronautical engineers. What was natural for them was not always 
natural for others; the plethora of homespun airplane designs that followed during 
the next decade were not all products of the design philosophy we have set forth. 
However, by the end of World War I, aeronautical engineering had come into its own, 
and virutally all airplanes designed since then have embodi~d the design philosophy 
discussed in Chapter 7. The case history described in the next section is a perfect 
example. 
8.11 DESIGN CASE STUDY: THE DOUGLAS DC-3 
The genesis of many airplane designs is competition. So it was in 1932, when Boeing 
was putting the final touches to the prototype of its 247 airliner-a pioneering, low­
wing monoplane, all metal, with twin engines wrapped in the new NACA low-drag 
cowling and with retractable landing gear. The Boeing 247 carried 10 passengers in a 
soundproof cabin at speeds near 200 mi/h. This airplane was expected to revolutionize 
commercial air travel. Because of this, the airlines were standing in line for orders. 
However, Boeing at that time was a member of the United Aircraft Group, which 
included Pratt & Whitney Engines and United Airlines. Hence, United Airlines was 
first in line, and was programmed to receive the first 70 new 247s to come off the 
production line. This put the other airlines in an untenable competitive position. 
Because of this, on August 5, 1932, Donald W. Douglas, president of Douglas 
Aircraft Corporation, received a letter from Transcontinental and Western Air, Inc. 
(TWA). Dated August 2, the same letter had been sent to Glenn Martin Company 
in Baltimore and Curtiss-Wright Corporation in St. Louis as well as to Douglas in 
Santa Monica. A facsimile of the letter to Douglas, signed by Jack Frye, a vice pres­
ident of TWA, is shown in Fig. 8.33. Frye was inquiring about Douglas's interest in 
designing a new commercial transport airplane; since TWA could not readily obtain 
the new Boeing 247, then in an aggressive fashion they went after their own state-of­
the-art airplane. Attached to Frye's letter was a one-page list of general performance 
specifications for the new airplane; this list is reproduced in Fig. 8.34. [Recall that 
the U.S. Army's list of specifications that led to the purchase of the Wright Military 
Flyer (see Fig. 7.5) was also one page long; clearly, 25 years later airplane specifi­
cations could still be given in a short, concise, clear-cut manner.] The specifications 
given by TWA and shown in Fig. 8.34 illustrate for the case of the DC-3 the first step in 
463 

===== PDF PAGE 478 =====
P A R T 3 @ Airplane Design 
TRANSCONTINENTAL & WESTERN AIR INC. 
KANSAS. Cln'. MISSOURI 
Augul!t 2-,d, 
19 32 
Douglas Aircraft Corporation, 
Clover Field, 
Santa Monica, California. 
Attention: Mr. DoMld Dough.e 
Dear Mr, Douglas: 
Transcontinentl!tl & Western Air 1~ interested 
in purchasing ten or more tri!!lotored transport plane~. 
I am attaching our general perfonnanee specifications, 
covering this equip:11ent and would appreciate your advising 
whether your Company is interested in this mi,mufactU!'ing 
job. 
If so, approxi!!lately how long would it take 
to turn out the first plame for eervic@ tests? 
Jf/GS 
End. 
N.B. 
Figure 8.33 
Very truly your~, 
~+ Jack Frye 
Vice Presid@nt 
In Charge of Operation~ 
Pl.$ase consider this information confidential ruld 
return ~pecifications if you are not interested.. 
SAVE TIME - USE THE AIR MAIL 
Facsimile of lhe letter from TINA to Donald Douglas. Douglas is later quoted as 
saying this letter was "the birth certificate of the modern airliner." 

===== PDF PAGE 479 =====
I 
CHAPTER B @ of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
~D111r~l ~rfor1Mne~ ~p,901r1e&tio!Ml 
Tr 1ui112ort ? h.ru~ 
le !1R!1 &ll ~tal tr1motor~d !!llOQoplan@ pr111r~rr~d b~t 
eOW)~tto~ 111tn.iet\!J"e or b1pl&D® WO\Ald ti@ eon11ii111red • 
.&1r.1 int@i"Ual 1tn.1etur-, t!lilUt be •tAl. 
, 2., ~@f'I fhrH e~iJUU! of 500 to 650 h.p. \l'i'Upll ll'ith l'.),.l 
~up€1rol'Mu-g@rg 6-l co~re1111on 0.K.), 
6,. 1 u~c~ ,llll.Ult aho b0 IIIAd~ for com.pht111 l::uitrw::11mt11, 
fl.:,1~ 111quipilll!&rrt. fuel o~~e1ty for eruieing r~°"® 
of 1060 !!Ul@i &t 150 &.p,h., orG'l'l' of two, at lG&tt 12 ~11~ 
@@~111r1 ~1th ool!llfortiflbl~ a~t, Lnd e..apl@ roo~, iUld the u1u1l 
llUIOl/lllM@OIJII @q1.11pm,1n.1t ,::1111.rrhd on 13. ?41.Ul/l~'l)I" pl&D6 ·1! thii 
t)'?@• PaylMd sihould b@ H lumt 2,SW lb&, rlth f\lll @qu1p­
mGt ul.d fu@l tor m.i..l.Jrum l"ili:ll,@. 
Top @p,,eid Hll ln'!!l (min~) 
Cni11ing ;peed t@a l@vol • 19 ~ top l?@•d 
~1.n.g 1pe@d not !!IOi:'e!I th&D. 
kat@ of olil!l.b i®~ l@'W'll (mi.ni111Um) 
~!"Tio@ o@11~ (~i~) 
hrv1@9 (ll@l..1.i,:ig uy t,wo engtzlu 
185 m..p.h. 
146 m.p.h. pl:.A~ 
65 m.p.h. 
uoo rt. p.111. 
21000 rt. 
10000 rt. 
'fhim plt.n@0 fully lo•d.l,d• l!.IJ!t i:ak@ 1att1fe~tO!"j t~k•-o~fl 
w:AMI" good l:IOll.tl"Ol ilit iliny f'l'U, @d.l"pOl"t 01l C.Dj C.:l!WJ~M!t.l.Oll of 
two ®D.g l..M I , 
lu:1au Caty, !liluoc.:ri, 
-Ult 2~, l 932 
8.34 Facsimile of the specifications from TWA, attached to letter in Fig. 8.33. 

===== PDF PAGE 480 =====
P RT 3 @ Design 
the intellectual design process discussed in Section 7.3.1, 
Fig. 7.3. 
as in 
The specifications called for an aH-meta1 trimotor that would have a 
cruising range of mi at a cruise of 150 mi.Jh. Of greatest 
however, was the requirement 
listed at the bottom of the page, that 
airplane at a full takeoff gross weight of lb be able to 
any TWA airport with one engine out At that the 
system was in Winslow, Arizona, at an elevation of ft. Other 
specifications called for a maximum velocity of at least 185 of 
not more than 65 mi/h, a minimum rate of climb at sea level of 
minimum service ceiling of ft, downward to 
engine out. 
Donald Douglas and Jack Frye had met several times before, at various aviation 
functions in the Los Angeles, area. held a strong mutual respect for 
each other. Since the formation of his company in 
dealt with designing and constructing military 
of torpedo airplanes for the However, he had been rP('P'1T"1 ,u,u4~u,A 
venturing as well into the commercial market passenger service had 
skyrocketed since Charles 
Lindbergh's historic solo flight across the Atlantic Ocean 
in 1927). So Douglas paid serious attention to Frye's letter. He took it home with 
him that night, staying awake until 2 AM pondering the ramifications. The next 
he met with his core engineering design group and went over the TWA 0µ,,v""v'-'A''""'~ 
one by one. The discussion lasted well into the evening. It was Tuesday. Douglas 
suggested they think about it and meet again that The group had made 
the decision to submit a proposal to discussion was to be about the 
basic nature of the airplane itself. 
The TWA specifications (Fig. called for a "trimotored 
preferred, but held out the possibility of the being a Trirnotor 
monoplanes were not new; the Fokker F-10 and the Ford trimotor had been in 
airplane service for almost 5 years. this configuration suffered a 
public setback on March 31, 1931, when a TWA Fok_ker trimotor crashed in a Kansas 
wheat field; killing among the passengers the famous Notre Dame football coach 
Kimte Rockne. As for the biplane the 
reduction via streamlining, and u;cnu,c,v0 
So when the Friday started out, it was no 
James H. "Dutch" Kindelberger, stated emphatically: 
were on the way out. 
that the chief engineer, 
I think that we're damn fools if we don't shoot for a twin-engined 
a trimotor. People are about the trimotors after the Rockne 
build anything that even looks like a Fokker or Ford? Both Pratt & and 
Wright-Aeronautical have some new on the test blocks that will be available 
the time we're ready for them. Lots of horses ... any two of them will more 
power than any now. 
Douglas agreed. As essential design decision was made without a 
calculation. 

===== PDF PAGE 481 =====
C H A PT E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
Arthur Raymond, Kindelberger's assistant, who had earned a master's degree in 
aeronautical engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1921 ( one of 
the few people with graduate degrees in aeronautical engineering at that time), was 
immediately thinking about the wing design. He suggested: "Why not use a modified 
version of Jack Northrop's taper wing? Its airfoil characteristics are good. The taper 
and slight sweepback will give us some latitude with the center of gravity." Raymond 
was referring to the innovative wing design by Jack Northrop, who had worked for 
Douglas between 1923 and 1927 and then left for Lockheed, finally forming his 
own company in 1931. (This is the same company that today builds the B-2 stealth 
bomber.) Northrop had developed a special cantilever wing which derived exceptional 
strength from a series of individual aluminum sections fastened together to form a 
multicellular structure. The wing is the heart of an airplane, and Raymond's thinking 
was immediately focused on it. He also wanted to place the wing low enough on 
the fuselage that the wing spars would not cut through the passenger cabin ( as was 
the case with the Boeing 247). Such a structurally strong wing offered some other 
advantages. The engine mounts could be projected ahead of the wing leading edge, 
placing the engines and propellers far enough forward to obtain some aerodynamic 
advantage from the propeller slipstream blowing over the wing, without causing the 
wing to twist. Also, the decision was to design the airplane with a retractable landing 
gear. In that regard Douglas said: "The Boeing's got one: We'd better plan on it too. 
It should cut down on the drag by 20 percent." Kindelberger then suggested: "Just 
make the nacelles bigger. · Then we can hide the wheels in the nacelles." The strong 
wing design could handle the weight of both the engines and the landing gear. 
The early 1930s was a period when airplane designers were becoming apprecia­
tive of the advantages of streamlining in order to reduce aerodynamic drag. (See Ref. 
8 for a detailed discussion of this history.) Retracting the landing gear was part of 
streamlining. Another aspect was the radial engines. Fred Stineman, another of Dou­
glas's talented designers, added to the discussion: "If we wrap the engines themselves 
in the new NACA cow lings, taking advantage of the streamlining, it should give us a 
big gain in top speed." This referred to the research at NACA Langley Memorial Lab­
oratory, beginning in 1928, that rapidly led to the NACA cowling, a shroud wrapped 
around the cylinders of air-cooled radial engines engineered to greatly reduce drag 
and increase the cooling of the engfoe. At this stage of the conversation, Ed Bur­
ton, another senior design engineer, voiced a concern: "The way we're talking, it 
sounds like we are designing a racing plane. What about this 65 mi/h landing speed 
Frye wants?" This problem was immediately addressed by yet another senior design 
engineer, Fred Herman, who expressed the opinion: "The way I see it, we're going 
to have to come up with some kind of an air brake, maybe a flap deal that will in­
crease the wing area during the critical landing moment and slow the p,lane down .... 
Conversely, it will give us more lift on takeoff, help tote that big payload." 
The deliberations extended into days. However, after a week of give-and-take 
discussions, they all agreed that the airplane design would 
1. Be a low-wing monoplane. 
2. Use a modified version of the Northrop wing. 
467 

===== PDF PAGE 482 =====
P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
3. Be a twin-engine airplane, not a trimotor. 
4. Have retractable landing gear, retracted into the engine naceHes. 
5. Have some type of flaps. 
6. Use the NACA cowlings. 
7. Locate the engine nacelles relative to the wing edge at the~" .. "''~'" 
position as established by some recent NACA research. 
The design methodology and philosphy exemplied by these early discussions 
between Douglas and his senior design engineers followed a familar pattern. No new, 
untried technology was being suggested. AH the design features itemized above were 
not new. However, the combination of all seven items into the same airplane was 
new. The Douglas engineers were looking at past airplanes and past developments 
and were building on these to scope out a new design. To a certain extent, they were 
building on the Northrop Alpha (Fig. 8.35). Although the Alpha was quite a different 
airplane (single-engine transport ca..'TYing six passengers inside the fuselage with an 
open cockpit for the it also embodied the Northrop multicellular cantilevered 
wing and an NACA cowling. Also, it was not 
lost on Douglas that TWA had been 
operating Northrop airplanes with great success and with low maintenance. 
During this first critical work of their deliberations, the small team of Dou­
glas designers had progressed through a semblance of the intellectual pivot points in 
4/'·JO'---------, 
8.35 Northrop 

===== PDF PAGE 483 =====
CHAPTER 8 e Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
7 .3, in order to draw the overall design conclusions itemized above. 
However. used more than a slide ruie for calculations-they drew also on the 
collective intuitive feelings of the group, honed by experience. They practiced the 
art of airplane design to the extreme. At the end of that week, a proposal to TWA 
was and Arthur Raymond and Wetzel (Douglas's vice president and 
general manager) took a train ride across the to deliver their proposal 
to the TWA executive office in New York. a three-week series of intense 
discussions took among the TWA representatives present at many of these 
meetings was Richard Robbins Jack Frye, and Charles Lindbergh 
(the same Charles fame for his transatlantic solo flight in 
l 927 and who served as a technical consultant to 
for the TWA contract, Raymond and 
Wetzel were successful in TWA of the merits of a twin-engine ("bimotor") 
airplane over a trimotor. A aspect of this consideration was the ability of the 
to on one engine, especially to takeoff at full gross weight 
from any airport the TWA route and to be able to climb and maintain level flight 
over the highest mountains the route. This was not a trivial consideration, and 
calculations had a certain degree of uncertainty-the uncertainty that 
is associated with the early aspects of the conceptual design process, as 
discussed in Chapter 7. called from New York to tell Donald Douglas about 
the critical nature of the one-engine-out performance's being a aspect of the 
discussions with TWA. When asked about his latest feelings as 
to whether the airplane design could meet this performance requirement, Raymond's 
was: "I did some slide-rule estimates. It comes out 90 percent yes and 10 
percent no. The l O percent is me awake at nights. One thing is sure, it's 
never been done before with an aircraft in the class we're talking about." 
conferred with who took the stand: "There's one way to 
find out. Build the and try it." made the decision-Raymond should 
tell TWA that would be able to construct such an 
On i 932, in Robbin's office, the contract was signed between 
TWA and to build the Douglas christened the project as the DC-1, 
the Douglas Commercial One. The contract called for the purchase by TWA of one 
service test airplane at the cost of $125,000, with the option (indeed, clear intent) 
of purchasing up to 60 additional airplanes, in lots of 10, 15, or 20 at $58,000 each. 
The contract was 42 pages long, 29 of which dealt specifically with the 
technical specifications. The first three pages of these technical specifications are 
reproduced in their form in Fig. b, and c, so that you can obtain a 
better of the detail to which the design had progressed that time. 
Of interest is the detailed breakdown of the in Fig. 8.36c. 
had compared to the 
one-page list shown in Fig. 8.34. in Fig. 8.37 is one page 
of the five from the contract with performance. By Figs. 8.36 
and 8.37 with the one-page document first sent out TWA (Fig. 8.34), the 
effect of the process on the details listed in the final contract is 
seen. The contract even went to the detailed extent of specifying such items 
as this: "Air sickness container holders shall be located 
a as to be reached with seat in any this was not 

===== PDF PAGE 484 =====
470 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
13 
Scl,mlulc "A" 
DOUGLAS BI-MOTORED TRANSPORT MA'l'ERIEL 
SPECIFICATIONS 
T. Characteristics 
l . General Type 
'l'his airplmw shall lw a low wing ea11tilliVPI' mo11opla1w with 
retractable diassis, tlH· ge11ernl proportio11s lwi11g sl10w11 011 llouglas 
l>rnwi11µ; No. :i:2!):!H!). It :,;hall lH' po11·L·1·1·d wit Ii l wo \Vri;dd ( iy,·loru: 
J\locl,.J P.<:.!O 1,' µ;1•:11yd (•t1;.d11t":-;, 1·,ll'l1 rnl1·d :ii ti:,o 111' nl s1·:1 11•\'1·1 a111l 
SlllH!l'!'liarg-t!d to (j(j() 111' al l!l;io l'IJIII al HOO() l'c!!l. 
2. Construction 
:J. Requirements 
'J'hc fo)Jowi11g el,arac!PJ'ist i1·s and SJH·<·ili<-:1tio11s sli:111 li1! adl1el'c<l 
to or licltl'l'cu i11 th" 1·011,dl'lw!io11 :ind p1•rl'or111;1111•1• ol' lliP nirpla111•. 
I I. Materials and Workmanshjp 
!\fatPriahi nncl nwthods ol' 1•crnslrn<'tiou approvl'd hy the J)ppartment 
of Comm1•r1·1i shall IH' 11s1•1l. I 11 1111· al,:,;1·111·1• ol' l>1•part 111n1it ol' ('11rn11wn·e 
111at1iri:d :-qw1·ili1·ati1111:,; thos1'. ol' 1111• II. S. ,\r111.,· ,\ir (!orp:-i :-11:ill Jin 
11s1•1l. Hdl<•r will, al his ow11 <·o:-1 a11d c•x1u•11s1i, pro111pt 1.v n·1111·cl.v uuy 
str11cl11rnl WL·akrwss, d1·1'<1 d of dl'si.!.!'11, worlrnrn11ship, or rnnt,•rinl that 
111ay PvidPn<·(• ibwlf drrrin!.\· th1• n1·<·l·pta11<·t> all(l/01· Sl'l'vil'e t<1st ,;, 
'rlre 8ell1:r will pro\'i1le an 111~1·11rat1! n111l 1·0111pl1•ll1 sy:;1,•m c·n1·1!t'ing 
tl,e im,fH·t·tio11 of 1111111:it,,ri:tf,.,, t'al,ri,·ati1J11 rrn·ll111d:-: ,lilt! fi11i.,li1·d p:irls. 
Ht•eonls ol' ull Sll<'li i11:-ip1·1·I io11 w,,rl, ,.,1,:111 111· l,,·pl 1•t1111plvl1• ;111d ~,1i:dl 
bu made a,·ailalilu to J:11,q•r's l'l'f'lY"'"'ilali,·I' 11po11 r1•q1w,..1. 
Sullit'ie11t tests ol' 111at,•rials slrnll 1,i• 111:1d1• I,!· 11111 S11 ll1•r 1111 nil lots 
of stock in onlet· to i11s11rn Buy<•r 1111• 11s1i ol' :tpprm·"d ain·rnl'I mnt,•rial 
iu the <·oust nrdiou ol' saitl t rn 11:-;port ai rplauc. 
Figure 8.36 
(a) 
Facsimile of the bimotor specifications from the contract signed between TWA and Douglas on 
September 20, 1932. {continued) 

===== PDF PAGE 485 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
(continued} 
111. General Requirements 
I. :Plying- Clmr1u:tcritttica 
'l'lio 11irplc1110 sl111II 1,11111ply willi l>1•11111·(11w11I. 111' ( 1011t1111!r1'.1! n•1p1irn­
rnc11t.s with rngard to gl:11ernl llyi11g- chamderisties m11l shall l,u co11-
trollablc to 1110 sntisl'11clio11 ol' tlw Buyer i11 all co11dit io11H ol' flight aml 
taxiiug, both wlien 1'11lly loadud and l·mpfy. Lali!rnl, )1111µ;it11di11al, and 
dirnctioual sl,tliility :-hull eornply witli lll:p11rt11w11I. ol' ('0111111Pl'<'C 
n•q11i1·1•1111•1tls. 'l'li1• l'on·,·s 111·1·1•ss.iry lo op1•r:il1• tli1! 1·0111 rols :0 liall he 
lig-ltl allll s,d isl'.tclur,v to B11yPr. 
2. Load Factors 
'J11rn airplane shall comply with Depa1·fnw11l ol' Commerce s(i'1!11gth 
req11i1·pm1•11ls 1111d i,;J1all 1111\'1! au npprov"d type c11rtilicate. 
H. Interchangeability 
All parf.H a11d assprnhlil's suh.i<•c.:l to r<m1oval shall h<' i11l<'l'<'l11111ge­
nhlc!. 'Plw c•ompldn 11a<'1·ll1! l'orward of' llw lirnwall, i1wlwli11.~ th1· 1•111.d11n 
in:-:falled, oil lank c1111l 1·11wli11~~. slntll 111• it1I.Pt'1•ha11~1·,tl1l1i rig-Id. aml )1:ft. 
IV. Detailed requirements 
1. Weights 
(n) Useful Load 
'J'hc aii·planc sl1111l lie clesiµ:11c•cl fo carry the following· 11sPl'11) lou<l: 
(1) <1rew: 
Pilot n11d <.'o-pilot (<iJ 170 llis. ench ....................... . 
(2) l1'1wl a11d oil 1'01· .l'ill11i1· 11 11or111al rn11~n of 7:lO 
111il1·s c1f (i:!.fi'./,, 111' (lllWl!I' 111 f1,000 l'l'l'I 11lfif1lll1• 
wit Ii :1 p:iyload of:: I()() lhs. 11111dl! lip ol': 
l'aHH(!llg"l!l'S, 12 (t"i"l 170 I lis ............................ . 
B:igg-ag1•, 1~ (<iJ ,10 llis ....................................... .. 
~Jail a11d 1·111·µ:o 
Or a payloc1d ol' ~.noo lhs. with 1'1tc!I 1111d oil for 
II l'llllg'l' of J,()()() miles Hf (i:!.f'>% of fJIJ\\'l'l' at. 
an all itud1i of 5,000 fod. 
(b) 
MO lbs. 
:!,040 1))1~. 
:Hill llrn. 
l , ooo I h:-i. 
:l,-100 lhs. 
471 

===== PDF PAGE 486 =====
472 P A R T 3 e Airplane Design 
(concluded) 
(Ii) Weight Empty 
II h, PHf.im1d«•d flwl. lh 11•"i~;·hf 1•mply of' f!w 11i 
lliH., :-mlidi vid1·d l!H follow:-;: 
Wing 
1rnil 
F1 uselngo 
N11!"ellnK 
LmHlini.; (l!ilH' 
Surl'n<'n cmd rnh; 
Tmd rnmmils 
Seals mid Safety BeHs 
Ji'!oorn nnd !"OV<1 l'i11g-
l I pliolslni11g and Nonnd lmrnlalion 
I nl<~rnnl pn rfilio11s nnd rni·k.-: 
Lavatory NfUipmcul aml wah1r 
H<'al illg :rnd veufilnl iHg- c•cp!ipnwHt 
F'il'P li>d inµ;nisl11•r:,,; :ind mi:wPllnmious 
l•!ltw! rit·al '1:q11ipmP11t 
Hadio 
I•'la res 
T<}ngi nos 
Propellers 
J~ngiuo neccssoriN; 
Starting syHIPm 
l1~11gi IH! COil trolt­
l1,ucl ~ys!em 
Oil Syslm1t 
( 1·) Gross Weight 
li:-;oful load (sp111\) 
Wtiight 1,:mply (1•sL) 
{1 l'OSS Weight 
(c) 
1,950 lhs .. 
220 
1,1 '..!fi 
320 
78:i 
l 10 
D5 
240 
12fi 
7!i 
GO 
50 
fiO 
2:!0 
135 
20 
1,8-IO 
330 
140 
80 
GO 
250 
no 
8,47fi 
14,GOO 

===== PDF PAGE 487 =====
C H A PT E R 8 @ Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
3D 
I Schedule "B!' 
I 
I 
I 
DOUGLAS BI-MOTORED PERFORMANCE SPECIFICATIONS 
to dulivery of ilw ai comp!do 
le::;!:,; ::;J11dl have be1;n rnatfo ui ilw pl.in!. ol' Sdltir ut 811111a Mo11il'a, ('.,di­
fornia, iH onfor lo ddermillu n:,; lwnoinnfl(•J' ::;ct forth that said trnm;-
ni i<•x i11 nil respt;c·!s wi1h tli<i followiug: 
(1) 'l'lio ai tlhall den1011:-;lrn(e il:, abili tu nwet the follow-
pol'i'onnuuees wlit•i1 folly loadL·d to !he licunsetl gross loud. 
(Standard altitude is HW1111I. 1d1en altitude is refened tu.) 
(a) 11 spel,d nt Z(·ni fed 
(b) High :,;peed al 8000 fl. 
(c) Uruising :;peed a! zeru l'L·,,(, 7°J'/u JJOWer 
) Crnisi11g spl'(:d al :JOOU l'l., 7;J% JHJ\V,,r 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
( i ) 
( j ) 
Crnising Sjll'ed al srniu rt.; 7:J'/ power 
Cruising sput•d ni zero !'L, (i:!.,-i;;;. puwet· 
at :°JOOO 
Crni:,;i11g spc(id nl HOUO l'I., 
La11ding spet:d al z;>ro 1'1,d 
Hate ol' dimli al z,,rn 1','.1,t 
!)O\l'Pl' 
17-lrnpli 
183 
1 :J;J mph 
l;iD mph 
]G~ Ill pl! 
!0 t+ Jll[Jh 
148 mph 
l::iO mph 
(i4 mph 
]030 fl/lllill 
(k) Hutu of dimh al 8000 l'L !J'.30 rt./rni11 
( l) Crnisillg range, normal f11d, :)000 n. at 
(i2.5'.fo powel' 730 mile:, 
(m) (1rnisi11g rnng1\ 1·np111·i!y 1'11d at ;1000 ft. 
ut.~Y,, power 
{u) Service eeiliug 
(o) ,\bsnlnle ('.1!ili11g 
( 8el'\'ice ceiling 011 Oil!! c11gi1w 
'!'he mellwd of dderrni 
lows: 
!000 mi !es 
2:2800 n. 
2-1800 fl. 
8000 l'L 
The 111 slwll lie fiowll ov1•r a spetid com·:,w, wliieh shall be 
ut uu al!i! ude ul' :WU !',·Pt or l('ss above :-.l:a lt,H·l, upprnpriuicly laiJ oul 
Facsimile of the performance specifications from the contract signed between TWA 
and Douglas on September 20, 1932. 
473 

===== PDF PAGE 488 =====
474 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
as trivial as it may seem today; the airplane was unpressurized, and hence it would 
be flying, as did all aircraft at that time, at low altitudes where there was plenty of air 
turbulence, especially in bad weather.) 
The concern that the Douglas designers put into the aspect of one-engine-out 
flight is reflected in a detailed technical paper written by Donald Douglas, and pre­
sented by Douglas as the Twenty-Third Wilbur Wright Memorial Lecture of the 
Royal Aeronautical Society in London on May 30, 1935. The annual Wilbur Wright 
Lectures were (and still are) the most prestigious lectures of the Society. It was a 
testimonial to Douglas's high reputation that he had received the Society's invitation. 
The paper (Ref. 59) was entitled: "The Developments and Reliability of the Modem 
Multi-Engine Air Liner with Special Reference to Multi-Engine Airplanes after En­
gine Failure." Douglas began his paper with a statement that is as apropos today as it 
was then: 
Four essential features are generally required of any form of transportation: Speed, 
safety, comfort and economy. 
However, today we would add environmentally clean to the list. Douglas went on: 
The airplane must compete with other forms of transportation and with other air­
planes. The greater speed of aircraft travel justifies a certain increase in cost. The 
newer transport planes are comparable with, if not superior to, other means of trans­
portation. Safety is of special importance and improvement in this direction demands 
the airplane designer's best efforts. 
Douglas then concentrated on engine failure as it related to airplane safety. He 
wrote: 
Statistics show that the foremost cause of accident is still the forced landing. The 
multi-engine airplane, capable of flying with one or more engines not operating, is 
the direct answer to the dangers of an engine failure. It is quite apparent, however, 
that for an airplane that is not capable of flying with one engine dead the risk increases 
with the number of engines installed. Hence, from the standpoint of forced landings, 
it is not desirable that an airplane be multi-engine unless it can maintain altitude 
over any portion of the air line with at least one engine dead. Furthermore, the risk 
increases. with the number of remaining engines needed to maintain the required 
altitude. In general, therefore, the greatest safety is obtained from-
1. The largest number of engines that can be cut out without the ceiling of the 
airplane falling below a required value; 
2. The smallest number of engines on which the airplane can maintain this given 
altitude. 
For airplanes equipped with from one to four engines, it follows that the order of 
safety is according to the list following. 
Douglas followed with a list of 10 options, starting with the category "four-engine 
airplane requiring 1 engine to maintain given altitude" as the most safe and "four­
engine airplane requiring 4 engines to maintain given altitude" as obviously the least 
safe. Fourth down on the list was the two-engine _airplane requiring one engine to 
maintain given altitude-this was the category of the DC-I (and the DC-2 and DC-3 
to follow). It is statistically safer than a three-engine airplane requiring two engines 
to maintain given altitude, which was fifth on Douglas's list. 

===== PDF PAGE 489 =====
CHAPTER 8 i;o Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
Having made his point about the relative safety of a twin-engine airplane capable 
of flying on one engine, Douglas turned to the flight performance of such an aircraft. 
Of particular note was the stability and control of a twin-engine airplane with one 
engine out. Because of its relevance to airplane design, and because we have not 
studied the effects of engine-out performance on airplane design to this stage in this 
book, we pursue further some of Douglas's thoughts on this matter. 
Consider a twin-engine airplane in straight and level flight. How can the airplane 
be controlled to maintain a straight and level flight path when an engine fails? Consider 
the airplane in Fig. 8.38, taken from Douglas's paper. Assume the right engine has 
~P'1A.l'IK!$ 
1 VECTORS A~£ Nor re :1e,1ue X 
2 "'<1AC,t'J ANtr .f.<'.,N,Y /N THE "' 
p,,e,ur,;,,v "' 80PI" ,Hc.J L.t2~LJ!fli.Jtf:1_ £~VATIP/'IJ 
3 <"JI/VC /IP l.f AJ.JVl'f£P e/ Jf!i: 
4 VPJ! .r,:;Aed dN N1U,eu,,;.1 M HJ('GJ£<°tr/'.,, 4 />'/, ,,v;_,,, $/,/, ,.,./,;,,. 
.1 sJ.·r,vvp,iAr M'1rf,f'l!'r.s ,y,;,r J1Nt1V1¥ Jf;1>~r •(l',"1 • 4 /Jd, •/,,(d,•~ 
6 Ntilf/'oftlt. A,Vt,;1.£ QI' 11rr11<H N<f/1" .Y/:o/11' p "'/'J! 
" ,01;,.,N$ PROP£L1..KR ArruAJ..tY ooes f\/Cr' b • TP 
;'!{OP VIV't...E3S L<.>C:K/£"0 1 
,#'/tj 1 .. t:<?V/1:./(!l!f/(.((1 Pr FC,~C.CS .0,Y rJ P/.-t:tOT{l./lf€£? 
Al/if P',!.tf/V£ /,Y $(,Y~t,,£ . .CN(f/(IIL' l'"UGHT 
11.-,r·1rv.t!_~ (I) Ee/olo A4'4U.t:' or t!UNK (ly'/Yl'f J.<(ltft) 
figure 8.38 Engine-out performance-zero bank (with skid). Original figure by 
Dona!d Douglas. 
475 

===== PDF PAGE 490 =====
476 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
failed, as indicated by the stationary propeller in Fig. 8.38. The thrust from the left 
engine is no longer balanced by an equal thrust from the right engine; instead, the 
thrust from the left engine creates a moment about a vertical axis through the center 
of gravity, which tends to yaw the airplane to the right. This yawing moment is 
counterbalanced by a horizontal force Uv in Fig. 8.38) on the vertical tail, which acts 
through a moment arm to the center of gravity. In this way the moments about the 
vertical axis will be balanced, and the airplane will not rotate about the vertical axis. 
However, lv is a right-side force, which if left unbalanced will cause the airplane to 
sideslip (translate) to the right. So lv must be compensated by an equal side force 
toward the left, shown as ls in Fig. 8.38. This is created by having the fuselage in a 
yawed position to the left, hence creating the left-side force ls on the fuselage. In tum, 
this cocks the vertical tail in the wrong direction. Therefore, the rudder on the vertical 
tail must have enough control authority to produce the required lv in the direction 
shown, even though the vertical tail is now at an unfavorable incidence angle. Note 
that in this attitude, the wings are still level, denoted by zero bank angle ¢0 . So Fig. 
8.38 illustrates one possible attitude of the airplane that produces a straight and level 
flight path after an engine failure, namely, a skid (fuselage yawed) with 0° angle of 
bank. The skid is in the direction of the operating engine. 
Figure 8.39 taken from Douglas's paper illustrates another possible attitude of 
the airplane for a straight and level flight path after engine failure. Here, the side 
force on the vertical tail l v necessary to counterbalance the yawing moment from the 
one operating engine is compensated by an equal and opposite side force obtained by 
banking the airplane (lowering the left wing) through the angle¢ so that a component 
of the weight, l w sin¢, is equal and opposite to lv, thus not creating a sideslip. In 
this attitude, there is no yaw; all lv is due to rudder deflection, not to any incidence 
angle for the vertical tail. Hence, Fig. 8.39 illustrates another possible attitude of the 
airplane that produces a straight and level flight path, namely, a bank with 0° angle 
of yaw. The bank is such that the lowered wing is on the same side as the operating 
engine. 
Figure 8.40 is a third possible attitude, one which is necessary if there is in­
sufficient rudder control authority to maintain either of the previous two. Here, the 
necessary lv to counter the moment due to the one operating engine is produced 
mainly by the incidence angle of the vertical tail because the rudder is not powerful 
enough to do the job. This requires the fuselage to be yawed to the right. In tum, 
a side force ls is produced on the yawed fuselage, pointing in the same direction as 
lv. The sum ls + lv must be balanced by an equal and opposite component of the 
weight obtained by banking the airplane to the left, such that l w sin <p = ls + lv. This 
requires more bank angle than the case shown in Fig. 8.39. Hence, Fig. 8.40 shows 
yet another attitude that results in a straight and level flight path, namely, a combined 
yaw and angle of bank, with the yaw in the direction of the failed engine, and the 
lowered wing in the direction of the operating engine. 
Note that in any of the three attitudes shown in Figs. 8.38 to 8.40, the drag is 
increased due to (1) the idling propeller, and (2) the increased aerodynamic drag on 
the vertical tail (the latter due to an increased induced drag on the tail). 
The case of engine-out performance is not frequently discussed in basic design 
texts. However, it has been discussed here because one-engine-out performance was 

===== PDF PAGE 491 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
.-----
> 
fUMAflKS 
1 V£C~$ Al!£ IVOT TO $~Ate 
? ..JCCQIVPA~ I' ,.,,,.,,e IVT.J NIIT .l,t!#,o,,t, 
' Nt>ANAJ. ;f,tld,~ #II" "l'TAC,< 
N'1r J#,w'N 
4 ro;..,A,,I. PNOP4~1.IR ACTUAi.£)" 006.S 
NOT sroP VIVL£5:S ,t,Ot:K,!"D 
£'1V/U8R(VM £t2fldTl€1Y.Z 
/,./.,../', .,...,.,,. ,.,,. •/,/,· ,. A/.,./,.· 
/,.1, ~;, ,.,.... 4- .q.,.~. ,...,,);, ,..,,.1,, •d,) 
/_,., ~-~ ,, .:;:;; 
,l'N _,,IV - • ~ 
,1c; 1~ .et1v1ueR1ve1 ol"" l""oAus c?« A ,v-1'1<?C.t21UR 
AllfPLAN£ l,Y .SIN(j,e 4"t:YGIN4' ,r4/{€Hr 
~rTITVP& /2) Z.£AO AIV(;I.E o.r Y'AIV /W,rH 8/IN~J 
Figure 8.39 Engine-out performance-zero yaw (with bank). Original figure by 
Donald Douglas. 
critical to the Douglas engineers as they embarked on building an airplane to satisfy the 
TWA specifications. From a design standpoint, this dictated the size of the vertical 
tail and the rudder. Indeed, even today the size of the vertical tail of multiengine 
airplanes, propeller- or jet-powered, is usually dictated by consideration of engine­
out performance. Also, engine-out performance dictates in part the lateral location 
of the engines on the wing. The closer the engines to the fuselage, the smaller the 
moment aboµt the vertical axis when an engine fails. Of course, for a propeller-driven 
airplane, the engines must be far enough away to allow sufficient propeller clearance 
with the fuselage. 
477 

===== PDF PAGE 492 =====
478 PA-RT 3 @ Airplane Design 
~ 
!. ~ Al;I! NOT J"i:> St:At!! 
(f.P<NU'e.1 AAJ{ .!H'74"H NY ?'111,f' 
,,,,,,u,,,o,,., ,, 41-r AJt&S EtPtl.li.lB/elVM /'t2VAT/i!?IVS 
,_ ,t'(),$1,VI!: t;' Ill tV.J.fVMifl) "/ fe•.f•J; <',11/,; ,,;,/, ,J,, ®/,./,· t',,i,/' o,;',,, 
4 $,';?C J"ORt:I ..W NAt"tEUl!S I$ N£UNll,? /;ll•.,t,;, •.I'...,,_ •(.I'~/.- 1"4,/)tl. I'/, (<>/,, , 1 
8 • .Sl.f',t/1/VJMA Y N.9,.,/t°Nl"J! Nt/11" JH{)""N P r ,,. I' ' ? ;, if,v 
d.N#/!tl'flU. IINdit,f tll"'AT;'A<l'I N.U" JNPIVN /_.,, t",t$¢J ~ 
?. IOI.I- PROPl!l.LER AC-7"<.IALLY P,::,ilf$ NO'T /, UN~ "'h 
J/$'J'>CJP VNI.IUSS LOC::Ho!O "' 
F//5. lc,. .!"<PV/{J,tV(/V('f ,v E<?t{(.t:S ON. 4 t,i -l'f~ Tt:?IJ..€R. 
"'"'lfPI.ANK /N ,t/tYffU.e £@/t'i.€ -t'"(.t6Hr 
,u-r,1rvP£ (J) YAW INTO 4/VG.t.£ i/JJ"' it!ANK {WIJ",'/ .. §JP{·JUPj 
Figure S.40 Engine-out performance-yaw into the angle of bank. Original figure by 
Donald Douglas. 
Another hallmark governed the early design of the DC-1, namely, creature com­
fort. This was particularly emphasized by Art Raymond who, after the TWA contract 
negotiations were over in New York, chose tofiy back to Santa Monica. Flying from 
coast to coast at that time was an endurance test, especially in the Ford trimotor that 
Raymond was on. Raymond suffered from the noise, vibration, cold temperature at 
altitude, srnall and primitive lavatory uncomfortable seats, and even mud 
splashed on his feet Indeed, he complained later: "When the landed on the 
puddle-splotched runway, a spray of mud, sucked in by the cabin air vents, splattered 
everybody." After to the Douglas Raymond stated: "We've got to 

===== PDF PAGE 493 =====
C H A P T E R 8 • Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
build comfort, and put wings on it. Our big problem is far more than just building 
a satisfactory performing transport airplane." The team set about immediately to de­
sign an airplane which included soundproofing, cabin temperature control, improved 
plumbing, and no mud baths. 
In· 1932, the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at the California Institute of 
Technology (GALCIT) had a new, large subsonic wind tunnel. It was the right facility 
in the right place at the right time. Situated at the heart of the southern California 
aeronautical industry at the time when that industry was set for rapid growth in the 
1930s, the California Institute of Technology (Cal Tech) wind tunnel performed tests 
on airplane models for a variety of companies that had no such testing facilities. 
Douglas was no exception. As conceptual design of the DC-1 progressed into the 
detailed design stage, wind tunnel tests on a scale model of the DC-1 were carried out 
in the Cal Tech wind tunnel. Over the course of 200 wind tunnel tests, the following 
important characteristics of the airplane were found: 
l. The use of a split flap increased the maximum lift coefficient by 35% and 
increased the drag by 300%. Recall from Chapter 5 that both effects are 
favorable for landing; the increase in (CL)max allowed a higher wing loading, 
and the corresponding decrease in L / D allowed a steeper landing approach. 
2. The addition of a fillet between the wing and fuselage increased the maximum 
velocity by 17 mi/h. 
3. During the design process, the weight of the airplane increased, and the center 
of gravity shifted rearward. For that case, the wind tunnel tests showed the 
airplane to be longitudinally unstable. The design solution was to add 
sweepback to the outer wing panels, hence shifting the aerodynamic center 
sufficiently rearward to achieve stability. The mildly swept-back wings of the 
DC-1 (also used on the DC-2 and DC-3 airplanes) gave these airplanes 
enhanced aesthetic beauty as well as a distinguishing configuration. 
A photograph of the DC-1 model mounted upside-down in the Cal Tech wind 
tunnel is shown in Fig. 8.41. The upside-down orientation was necessary because 
the model was connected by wires to the wind tunnel balance above it, and in this 
position the downward-directed lift kept the wires taunt. Dr. W. Bailey Oswald, at 
Figure 8.41 A model of the Douglas DC-1 mounted upside-down in the Cal Tech wind tunnel, late 
1932. 
479 

===== PDF PAGE 494 =====
480 P A R T 3 ® Airp1ane Design 
that time a professor at Cal Tech who was hired Douglas as a consultant on the 
DC-1 aerodynamics, said later on: "If the '.Vind tunnel tests had not been made, it 
is very possible that the airplane would have been unstable, because all the previ­
ous engineering estimates and normal investigations had indicated that the original 
arrangement was satisfactory." [We note that this is the same Bailey Oswald who 
introduced the Oswald efficiency e0 defined in Eq. Beginning in 1928, Arthur 
Raymond taught a class on the practical aspects of design at Cal Tech, and 
Oswald attended the class in the first year. Tne two became trusted colleagues. Fi­
nally, reflecting on his first action upon returning to Santa Monica after his trip to 
the TWA offices in New York, Raymond wrote later "The first thing I did 
when I got back was to contact Ozzie (Oswald) and ask him to come to Santa Monica 
to help us, for that one-engine-out case still bothered me. I told him we needed 
him for a little while, but he stayed until retirement in and ultimately had a 
large section working for him."] 
On July l, 1933, the prototype DC-1 was for its first flight. It took less than 
one year from the day the original TWA letter arrived in Douglas's office to the day 
that the DC-1 was ready to fly. The weather was bright and dear, with a gentle breeze 
blowing.in from the ocean. At exactly 12:36 PM the DC-1, with test pilot Carl Cover 
at the controls, lifted off the runway at Clover Field in Santa Monica, California. The 
first flight almost ended in disaster. As Cover put the DC-1 in a climb about 30 s 
after takeoff, the left engine quit; a moment later, the right engine sputtered to a stop. 
However, as the airplane nosed over, the engines stai'1:ed again. Cover started to climb 
again, but once again the engines stopped. They started again when the nose dipped 
down. For the next 10 min, in a display of expert piloting, Cover was able to coax 
the DC-1 up to 1,500 ft, following a sawtooth flight path alternating between a 
the engines cutting off, a noseover, the engines sta_rting again, another climb until the 
engines again quit, etc. At 1,500 ft, the DC-1 was at a safe enough altitude to allow 
Cover to execute a gentle bank and to return safely to the runway. 
Nobody knew what was wrong. The airplane and the appeared to be me-
chanically sound. Over the next 5 days the engines were ta.1<en apart and reassembled 
more than a dozen times. On the test block, the engines would run perfectly. Finally, 
the trouble was found in the carburetors that metered fuel to the engines-they had 
been installed backward, in such a fashion that when the climbed, the gaso-
line could not flow uphill, and the fuel was cut off. The carburetors 
were then rotated 180°, and the trouble disappeared. The rest of the DC-1 test 
program was carried out successfully. The airplane met all its flight specifications, in­
cluding the one-engine-out performance at the highest altitudes encountered along the 
TWA routes. It was a wonderful example of successful, enlightened design. 
An interesting contrast can be made in regard to the time from design rnnc-,,,..,,.,,..,n 
to the first flight. During World War I, some were designed laying 
out chalk markings on the floor and rolling out the finished 2 weeks later. 
Fifteen years later, the process was stiH that for the DC-1 being about 
11 months. Compare this to the today's modern civil and 
airplanes, which sometimes takes close to a decade between 
first flight. 
Only one DC-1 was built. The which involved 1er,gt11en 
the fuselage by 2 ft and adding two more seats to make it a , "'··ua.,~ .... 

===== PDF PAGE 495 =====
C H A P T E R 8 e Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
iabeled the DC-2. The first DC-2 was delivered to TWA on May 14, 1934. Altogether, 
Douglas manufactured l 56 DC-2s in 20 different models, and the airplane was used 
airlines around the world. It set new standards for comfort and speed in commercial 
air travel. But the airplane that really made such travel an economic success for the 
airlines was the next outgrowth of the DC-2, namely, the DC-3. 
As in the case of the DC-1, the DC-3 was a result of an airline initiative, not a 
company initiative. Once again, the requirements for a new airplane were being set 
the customer. This time the airline was American Airlines, and the principal force 
behind the idea was its tall, soft-spoken, but determined Texan Cyrus R. Smith. C. 
R. Smith had become president of American Airlines on May 13, 1934. American 
Airlines was operating sleeper service, using older Curtiss Condor biplanes outfitted 
with pullman-sized bunks. On one flight of this airplane during the summer of 1934, 
Smith, accompanied by his chief engineer, Bill Littlewood, almost subconsciously 
remarked, "Bill, what we need is a DC-2 sleeper plane." Littlewood said that he 
thought it could be done. Smith lost no time. He called Douglas to ask if the 
DC-2 could be made into a sleeper airplane. Douglas was not very receptive to 
the idea. Indeed, the company was barely able to keep up 
with its orders for the 
DC-2. Smith, however, would not take no for an answer. The long-distance call 
went on for 2 h. costing Smith over $300. Finally, after Smith virtually promised 
that American Airlines would buy 20 of the sleeper airplanes, Douglas reluctantly 
agreed to embark on a design study. Smith's problem was that he had just committed 
American Airlines to a multimillion-dollar order for a new airplane that was just in 
the imagination of a few men at that time, and the airline did not have that kind of 
money. However, Smith then traveled to Washington to visit his friend and fellow 
Texan Jesse Jones, who was the head of Reconstruction Finance Corporation, a New 
Deal agency set up by President Franklin Roosevelt to help U.S. business. Smith got 
his money-a $4,500,000 loan from the government. The new project, the Douglas 
Sleeper Transport, the DST, was on its way. 
Design work on the DST, which was quickly to evolve into the DC-3, started in 
earnest in the fall of 1934. Once again, model tests from the Cal Tech wind tunnel 
were indispensable. The new design outwardly looked like a DC-2. But the fuselage 
had been widened and lengthened, the wingspan increased, and the shape of the 
rudder and vertical stabilizer were different. In the words of Arthur Raymond (Ref. 
"From the DC-1 to the DC-2, the changes were minor; from the DC-2 to the 
DC-3, they amounted to a new airplane." The different plan view shapes of the DC-2 
and DC-3 are shown in Fig. 8.42. The wind tunnel tests at Cal Tech were overseen by 
Professor A. L. Klein and Bailey Oswald. During the tests, a major stability problem 
was encountered. Klein stated: "The bigger plane with its change in the center of 
gravity had produced the stability of a drunk trying to walk a straight line." However, 
slightly modifying the wing and changing the airfoil section, the airplane was 
made stable; indeed, the DST finally proved to be one of the most stable airplanes in 
existence at that time. The first of the DST was on December 17, 1935. After 
the efforts of over 400 engineers and drafters, the creation of 3,500 drawings, and 
some 300 wind tests, the airplane flew beautifully. American Airlines began 
service of the DST on June 25, 1936. 
The distinguishing aspects of the DST compared to the DC-2 were that its payload 
was one-third greater 
and its gross weight was about 50% larger. These aspects did 
481 

===== PDF PAGE 496 =====
482 P A R T 3 ® Airplane Design 
Figure 8.42 Comparison of the DC-2 (left) and DC-3 (right) 
plan forms. 
not go unappreciated by Douglas. If the bunks were taken out and replaced by seats, 
the airplane could carry 21 passengers in a relative state of This was yet 
another new airplane-the DC-3. In fact, the time Douglas gave his 1935 annual 
report to his board of directors, the DC-3 was already moving down the production 
line in parallel with the DST. 
Less than 100 airplanes in the sleeper configuration-DST-were produced. 
But when the DC-3 production line was finally shut down at the end of World 
War 10,926 had been built. The vast majority of these were for the military, 
10,123, compared to 803 for the commercial airlines (see Ref. 6 The DC-3 was an 
amazing success, and today it is heralded many aviation enthusiasts as the most 
famous airplane of its era. A three-view of the DC-3 is shown in Fig. 8.43. 
The success of the DC-3 was due to the technology which was so embod-
ied in its design--the streamlined shape, NACA cowlings, retractable landing gear, 
split flaps, variable-pitch propellers, multicellular wing stmcture, etc. It was also due 
to the design objective of carrying more people in greater comfort with more safety 
at a faster 
speed than possible in other existing airplanes at that time. The flying 
public loved it; the DC-3 opened the doors for successful passenger-carrying airlines, 
greatly expanding the number of people flying and the number of routes flown during 
the late 1930s. 
To be more specific, the DC-3 made money for the airlines. It did this through 
the combination of improved aerodynamic and engine efficiency, and the fact that 
its passenger capacity was higher than that of other existing transports example, 
21 seats compared to 14 seats on the DC-2). The improved aerodynamic efficiency 

===== PDF PAGE 497 =====
CHAPTER 8 @ 
Wrighl Cydooe ~ G102 • "'led 
920 H~~- !IW<imwn 1220 H~u 
r 
Figure 8.43 
~-3, 162211; OC-2, 12.075 
oc-,, 23!!00; oc-2, moo 
OC-3: :IS.I h. pouq. ft. 
DC2: 19.4 lilo. pe.r '"I· ft 
OC-3, 94' 7"; OC-2. 85 ft. 
Three-view of the Douglas DC-3. 
Design of a Propeller-Driven Airplane 
i'u,,oiogo 
p.,.,or U)!Wlll 
l'O'M>i'LoodilOS 
1'""'1"$• (Boo)') 
l'lm!og@ (Boo)') 
!foi~Ovfflll! 
H•i;h! Ovffli.ll 
OC-3: 13.311,,i. 
OC-2: !U loo. 
64' S Ill' OC-3. 
6l' II 311;• OC-2. 
OC-2: 21' 1118". 
OC-3: 23' 6 131!6" 
94'7" 
483 

===== PDF PAGE 498 =====
484 
Gross weight (lb) 
Payload weight (lb) 
Wingspan (ft) 
Fuselage length (ft) 
Airfoil section 
Engines 
Maximum speed (mi/h) 
Cruising speed (mi/h) 
Cruising range (mi) 
P A R T 3 111 Airplane Design 
can be seen by comparing the values of maximum L / D for several contemporary 
airplanes. 
Airplane (LID)msx 
Ford 5-AT Trimotor 9.5 
Northrop Alpha I 1.3 
Lockheed Vega l l.4 
Boeing247D 13.5 
Douglas DC-3 14.7 
Clearly, the DC-3 was the epitome of aerodynamic efficiency for its time. In terms 
of economics, a good metric is the direct operating cost (DOC) in cents per available 
seat-mile. The DOC for several airplanes is tabulated below, obtained from Ref. 62. 
Airplane DOC 
Ford Trimotor 2.63 
Lockheed Vega 2.51 
Boeing 247 2.11 
Douglas DC-3 l.27 
The DC-3 was a major improvement in direct operating costs; it was a money maker 
for the airlines. 
It is appropriate to end this section with some specifications and performance 
data for both the DC-2 and DC-3. 
DC-2 
17,880 
2,180 
85 
62 
NACA 2215 at root tapered to NACA 2209 at tip 
Two Wright SGR-l820-F3, 1,420-hp total 
205 
180 
l,200 
DC-3 
24,000 
3,890 
95 
64.5 
NACA 2215 at root tapered to NACA 2206 at tip 
Two Wright Cyciones, l ,700 hp total 
212 
188 
,260 
The increase in fuselage length and wingspan for the DC-3 compared to the DC-2 is 
illustrated in Fig. 8.42. Finally, a partial cutaway of the DC-3 is shown in Fig. 8.44. 

===== PDF PAGE 499 =====
..,, m· 
C: 
; 
«> 
t 
CL 
~ s· 
(Cl 
Q... 
y 
(1) 
~ 
C: 
(Q 
0 
"' CJ 
(") 
w 
Oil cooler 
Oil tank 
~ 
~~ 
Main fuel tanks Passenger entry 
.,,/ Rudder -fabric covered 
Mail compartment 
\ -......._ '',:>, '-. '<'""""" ~ AHcroo -fabric oornW 
Main undercarriage -retractable 
D ... II/ e-icmg stnps on a 
flying surfaces 
() 
I 
)> 
~u 
-< 
m 
"' 00 
~ 
v 
(I) 
"' ao· ::, 
0 ...,, 
"' ~ 
.g 
g_. 
f 
t) 
::i. < 
'' ~:I 
>-ea· 
;;" ::, 
(I) 
t 
1.11 

===== PDF PAGE 500 =====
486 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
The design of the DC-1, DC-2, and DC-3 series is a classic case history from 
the era of the mature propeller-driven airplane, the period essentially between 1930 
and 1945. Indeed, the DC-3 greatly helped to usher in that era. This case history 
shows how the design philosophy described in Fig. 7.3 was tailored by the Douglas 
intuitiveness, experience, and art of the engineers. Although airplane design at that 
time was much more organized than during World War I, there was still plenty of 
room for the inventiveness of an individual to play a strong role. Douglas DC-3s are 
still flying today (and will be into the twenty-first century), a testimonial to the design 
philosophy and methodology of the Douglas design team. 

===== PDF PAGE 501 =====
c:hapl'er 
Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
The modern jet transport can be described as the largest integration of technology 
into a self-sufficient unit. AH it needs to fly is a full fuel tank, a small crew, and a 
long runway. Its economic success depends on performance, low maintenance costs 
and high passenger appeal. It is unique in that all major sections are highly technical 
in content, from the wing tips to the nose and the tail. Designing the individual 
components and fitting them together into a cohesive whole is a long process that 
cannot be expressed in a formula. Airplane design is a combination of industrial art 
and technology. Usually the process of resolving the art precedes the application of 
formulae. 
William H. Cook, Retired Chief of the 
Technical Staff, Transport Division 
Boeing Airplane Company, 1991 
The Skunk Works is a concentration of a few good people solving problems far in 
advance-and at a fraction of the cost-of other groups in the aircraft industry by 
applying the simplest, most straightforward methods possible to develop and produce 
new projects. AU it is really is the application of common sense to some pretty tough 
problems. 
487 
Clarence L. "Kelly" Johnson, 
Retired 
Director of the Lockheed 
Advanced Development Projects 
(The Skunk Works), 1985 

===== PDF PAGE 502 =====
488 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
On August 27, 1939-five days before the beginning of World War II-a small 
airplane rolled sluggishly down the runway adjacent to Heinkel Aircraft Factory in 
Germany. Gaining speed, it finally left the ground and climbed to 2,000 ft. Heinkel's 
test pilot, Erich Warsitz, was at the controls. For 6 min Warsitz circled gracefully 
around the field, and then he came in for a landing. What was revolutionary about his 
flight is that the airplane had no propeller. The aircraft was the Heinkel 178-the first 
airplane to fly powered by a jet engine. Shown in Fig. 9 .1, the Heinke} 178 achieved a 
maximum speed of 360 mi/h, not much different from the maximum velocity of some 
propeller-driven fighters at that time. However, it was an experimental airplane-the 
first jet airplane-and in the elated words of Ernst Heinkel, "He was flying! A new 
era had begun." 
Indeed, that first flight of the He-178 on August 27, 1939, constituted the second 
revolution in flight in the twentieth century, the first being the flight of the Wright 
Flyer on December 17, 1903. When the small and relatively simple He-178 left the 
ground and circled the small onlooking crowd standing on the ramp of the airfield 
below, the jet age was born. Never mind that something was wrong with the landing 
gear, such that it would not retract. Erich Warsitz had to fly the entire 6 min flight 
with the landing gear down. But it did not matter, history had been made. 
We are now deep into the jet age, as discusssed in Section 1.2.4, and nothing 
else more revolutionary appears to be on the horizon. Today, virtually all military 
aircraft and commercial transports are jet-powered. Most new executive aircraft are 
also jets, and the gas-turbine engine is even beginning to power a few small general 
aviation aircraft. Therefore, any consideration of airplane design today almost by 
Figure 9.1 The He-178, the first jet-propelled airplane to successfully Ay, on August 
27, 1939. (From Cook, Ref. 63, with permission.) 

===== PDF PAGE 503 =====
C HAP TE R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
default deals with a jet-propelled airplane. However, the design philosophy and 
general methodology for the design of jet airplanes are the same as described in 
Chapter 7, which is to say, generic in nature. We have explicitly illustrated this 
design philosophy in great detail in Chapter 8 for a propeller-driven airplane. For 
the design of a jet airplane, the intellectual approach is essentially the same, only 
some of the details are different. Therefore, there appears to be little to gain ( except 
possibly a lot of repetition and boredom on the part of the reader) to illustrate the 
design of a jet airplane by following the same detailed path laid out in Chapter 8 for a 
propeller-driven airplane. Instead, in this chapter we will discuss the design of several 
pioneering jet airplanes; these discussions will essentially be case histories, but with 
a twist. The twist will be specific discussions, as appropriate, of some technical 
details of jet airplane design that are different from those covered in Chapter 8 for a 
propeller-driven airplane. In this way we aim to do justice to this chapter, giving you 
a good idea of how to design a jet-propelled airplane, but without repeating the type 
of detailed calculations illustrated in Chapter 8. 
9 .2 THE DESIGN OF SUBSONIC/fRANSONIC 
JET-PROPELLED AIRPLANES: A CASE STUDY 
OF THE BOEING 707 AND 727 
The Boeing 707 is shown in Fig. 1.33; return to this figure and review the related short 
discussion of the 707 in Chapter I. Examining Fig. 1.33, we see a sleek, swept-wing 
commercial jet transport that first entered airline service in 1958. As is usual with 
many airplane designs, the Boeing 707 was evolutionary; it was derived from Boe­
ing's experience with the earlier designs for the B-47 and B-52 jet bombers. However, 
the B-47 itself was revolutionary-the first successful swept-wing jet bomber, with 
the engines housed in pods mounted underneath the wing. So the Boeing 707 was 
a derivative from an earlier airplane that was itself a revolutionary step. Further­
more, the 707 became the first successful civil jet airliner, and in that sense it was 
revolutionary because it dramatically changed airliner travel. 
In this section we will explore the design philosophy of the Boeing 707, as well 
as that of the next Boeing jet transport, the trimotor 727. However, to appreciate this 
design philosophy, we should start at the beginning, with the revolutionary design of 
the B-47 jet bomber. 
9.2.1 Design of the B-47-A Precursor to the 707 
As discussed in Chapter 7 and shown in Fig. 7.3, the first pivot point in the design 
of a new airplane is a statement of the requirements. For the B-47, this first took 
the form of a study contract awarded to five aircraft companies in late 1943 by the 
Bombardment Branch of the U.S. Army Air Forces at Wright Field in Dayton, Ohio. 
The purpose of this contract was to have each company design a jet-propelled bomber, 
with the possibility that the Army would buy a prototype from each manufacturer. 
489 

===== PDF PAGE 504 =====
P A R T 3 1J Airplane 
Each of the aircraft was to be powered the GE TG- l. 80 then 
only in the design stage. The Army had such little experience with jet airi,Jlanes at 
the time that virtually the only requirement was that the airplanes in these studies 
be jet-powered. From these studies, in April 1944, the i\rrny was able to establish 
a preliminary specification for a four-engin.: bomber. 
and Boeing submitted design proposals which were very conventional with 
high-aspect-ratio straight and the engines mounted in nacelles that faired 
into the wings. Eventually, North American's design became the B-45, 
the first U.S. jet bomber to go into service; the first of the B-45 was in March 
1947, and 142 were manufactured. 
The aerodynamicists at Boeing, however, were not satisfied with the performance 
of any of these straight-wing designs, including their own design. Wind tunnel data 
showed the critical Mach number for these designs to be lower than desired. As a 
result, they delayed submitting a detailed design to the Air Forces. in May 
1945, a technical intelligence team made up of U.S. scientists and engineers 
into a defeated Germany and discovered a mass of German test data on swept 
(see Section l.2.4). One member of that team was George Schairer, a young 
aeronautical engineer who was pa..,:icipating in Boeing's jet bomber design. After 
studying the German data, Schairer quickly wrote to the team, them 
to the interesting design features of the swept wing and its potential for increasing 
the critical Mach number of the airplane. a more detailed discussion of the 
history of the swept wing and how its advantages were 
aeronautical industry, see chapter 9 of Ref. The Boeing 
dropped their straight-wing design and concentrated on the""''~"'-"" 
not without some skepticism and opposition from other parts of the company. At that 
time, Boeing was fortunate to have its own wind which went 
into service in 1944 after a 3-year of development. The test section was 8 ft 
high, 12 ft wide, and 20 ft 
long. With an motor, 
the tunnel was 
able to achieve Mach 0.975 with an empty test section. No other U.S. company had 
such a facility. The original decision in 1941 to build the wind tunnel was somewhat 
of a gamble on the part of Boeing executives-the gamble paid off after the 
war, because it was in this facility that Boeing was able to co!Iect the necessary data 
for the design of a swept-wing bomber. 
The design team worked through a number of different configurations. Figure 
9.2 (from Ref. 63) shows the design evolution of what became the final vc"""/0,W 
of the B-47. In addition to the swept the location of the 
several design choices. Engine nacelles with the 
left) created an effective thickening of the 
When the engines were relocated to the of the 
part), the body had to be made wider and the exhaust 
would scrub the top of the 
airplane-both undesirable features. When the Boeing design team leaders Ed Wells 
and Bob Jewett took this configuration to field in in October 
the Army Air Forces Project Office resoundedly so. The 
Project Office wanted the engines to be mounted on the 
bombers. On the trip back to Wells and Jewett conceived the idea 

===== PDF PAGE 505 =====
April 1946 
Bicycle gear 
extended wing tops 
C HA PT E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
/llll 
North American 
B-45, Convair 
XB-46 
.. 4' 
June 1945 
Four engines 
over wing 
September 1945 
Two aft engines 
added 
• .. 
Figure 9.2 The design evolution of the Boeing B-47. (From Cook, Ref. 63, with 
permission.) 
the engines in pods suspended below the wing on struts. It was a radical idea for 
its time, but Boeing felt it had no choice, since Wright field had so firmly rejected 
the previous design. Once again, the Boeing high-speed wind tunnel was vital. The 
pod-on-strut configuration was tested and refined. The results showed that if the pods 
were located low enough under the wing that the jet exhaust did not impinge on the 
trailing-edge flaps when fully deployed, and if the location were forward enough such 
491 

===== PDF PAGE 506 =====
492 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
that the exit of the engine tailpipe was forward of, or just in line with, the wing leading 
edge, then there was virtually no unfavorable aerodynamic interference between the 
pods and the wing-in the words of Bill Cook (Ref. 63), "The wing was performing 
like the pods were absent." In essence, the underslung jet pods could be designed 
with very low drag characteristics. 
With the design features of the swept wing and the podded engines underneath 
the wings,.Boeing was way ahead of any of its competitors. But there were other 
unqiue design problems to solve. Not desiring to retract the landing gear into the 
relatively thin, 12%-thick wings, and avoiding fuselage side bulges if a conventional 
tricycle arrangement were retracted into the side of the fuselage, Boeing engineers 
chose a bicycle landing gear which retracted directly into the bottom of the fuselage. 
However, this meant that the airplane could not rotate on takeoff, so a large incidence 
angle of the wing relative to the fuselage had to be adopted-8° between the wing 
chord and the horizontal ground-to allow enough lift to be generated for takeoff. 
And then there were flexure problems. The B-47 wing had a very high aspect ratio of 
9.43; no other swept-wing airplane since has had such a high aspect ratio. Also, the 
fuselage was long and thin. Both the wings and the fuselage flexed during gust loads 
in flight. The effects of these flexures were not major problems, but they needed to be 
taken into account in the stability and control aspects of the airplane. In addition, the 
high sweepback of the wing, 35°, gave the B-4 7 a substantial degree of lateral stability 
(a high effective dihedral) and an unacceptable Dutch-roll characteristic. The Boeing 
engineers designed a full-time stability augmentation system to solve the Dutch-roll 
problem; it consisted of a rate gyro that generated corrective rudder deflection. It was 
the first use of a full-time stability augmentation system on a production airplane, and 
the same technique is still used today. 
The first flight of the XB-47 took place on December 17, 1947 (44 years to the 
day after the first flight of the Wright Flyer). The Air Force had agreed to purchase 
two prototypes, but amazingly enough did not show great enthusiasm for the new 
bomber of revolutionary design. This was mainly due to the poor performance of the 
earlier straight-wing jet bombers, such as the North American B-45, which had soured 
Wright Field on the idea of jet bombers in general. Even top Boeing management 
was cautious about the XB-47, and the flight tests which took place at Moses Lake 
airfield, about 120 mi from Seattle, were initially carried out without fanfare. The 
exception was the small flight test crew at Moses Lake, who immediately witnessed 
the tremendous performance characteristics of the airplane. Indeed, the early tests 
quickly proved that the drag of the XB-47 was 15% less than the predicted value-a 
cause for great celebration, since this meant the range of the airplane was greater than 
expected, something of real importance for a bomber. The low drag results finally 
got the attention of the Boeing management in Seattle, and after that, interest in the 
airplane suddenly picked up within the company. This was followed by an event that 
was essentially a happenstance. Although the Air Force test pilots flying the XB-47 
were almost finished with their test program, the Air Force was still not showing 
great interest; the Project Office at Wright Field had turned its attention to turboprop 
bombers, thinking that turboprops were the only engines that would give the necessary 
long range for bombers. General K. B. Wolfe, head of bomber production at Wright 

===== PDF PAGE 507 =====
C H A P T E R 9 @ Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
Field, made a brief visit to Moses Lake on his way back to Dayton from a meeting 
with Boeing in Seattle on the design of a new piston engine bomber labeled the· B-54. 
General Wolfe took a 20-min in the XB-47. He was so impressed with the 
airplane's performance that immediately after landing he declared that the Air Force 
would by it "as is." In the end, the Air Force bought 2,000 B-47s. That 20-min flight 
General Wolfe revolutionized strategic bombing. 
The performance capability that caused this revolution is summarized in Fig. 9.3. 
Because of its aerodynamically clean, thin, high-aspect-ratio wing, the L / D of the 
B-47 was higher than that of either the B-17 or the B-29 from World War as shown 
in Fig. 9.3a. Moreover, because of the highly swept wing, the severe drag-divergence 
effect was not encountered until the Mach number was greater than 0.8. The high 
L/ D of the B-47 was necessary to counter the poorer propulsive efficiency of the jet 
compared to that of the piston-engine airplanes, in Fig. 9.3b. Recall Eq. (5.152) for 
range: 
V00 L Wo R= - -ln-
c1 D W1 
[5.152] 
Equation (5.152) is a generic equation that applies to a jet or a propeller-driven 
airplane, as long as c1 is the thrust specific fuel consumption for both types. Also, 
from Eq. (3.43) relating the specific fuel consumption in terms of thrust c1 to the 
specific fuel consumption in terms of power c, we have 
[9.1] 
So Eq. (5.152) can also be written as Eq. (5.153): 
R = T/pr !::_ ln Wo 
C D W1 
[5.153] 
B-17 ., B-47 
20 ~ B-47 2.0 1 ·;~ 
2.0 i-
"1~ 
I I 
;§' 
I 
• B-29 
" G B-17 .c Wo L 
lOnl 0. 
75 5 
IOI~ 
W1 1.0 
'< 1945 jet 
s ~ 
5. .,. 
OL 
• Long-range 
cruise 
0 I 
0 0.4 0.8 0 0.4 0.8 0 0.4 0.8 
(a) Mach number (b) Mach number (c) Mach number 
figure 9.3 Three airplane characteristics !hot influence range: {a) lift-to-drag ratio; (bi 
propulsive efficiency; (c) raiio of gross weigh! lo fuel-empty weight. Comparison 
betNeen the B- 17 and B-29 from World War !I with the B-47 iel bomber. 
493 

===== PDF PAGE 508 =====
494 P A R T 3 @ Airplane Design 
From Eq. (9.l) the terms V00 /c1 and T/pr/c are entirely equivalent; they are the same 
measure of propulsive efficiency. The dimensions are power multiplied by time per 
unit weight of fuel consumed, for example, hp·h/lb. The higher this value is, the 
more horsepower for a longer time is obtained from l lb of fuel. The units of T/pr / c 
on the ordinate of Fig. 9.3b are hp,h/lb. Note from this figure that the propulsive 
efficiency for the two famous Boeing propeller-driven bombers from World War II, 
the B-17 and the B-29, was on the order of 2 hp·h/lb at low Mach numbers, whereas 
the propulsive efficiency for a jet in 1945 was considerably smaller, on the order 
of 0.2 hp·h/lb, at the same low Mach numbers. However, note that the variations 
of T/pr/c and V00 /c1 with V00 are totally different (Mach number rather than V00 is 
used as the abscissa in Fig. 9.3b, but it makes no difference in the variations shown). 
For the term T/pr/c, c is relatively constant with velocity (see Section 3.3.1), but the 
propeller efficiency dramatically drops at higher speeds due to compressibility effects 
(shock waves) at the propeller tips. For the cases of the B-17 and B-29 in Fig. 9.3b, 
'f/pr/c is therefore relatively constant with M00 until these compressibility effects are 
encountered, beyond which 1/pr (hence T/pr / c) plummets. On the other hand, consider 
the term V 00 / Ct for a jet. The value of Ct is approximately constant with velocity, 
although it may increase mildly with velocity as indicated in Section 3.4. l. However, 
the major velocity variation of V00 /c1 is due to the presence of V00 in the numerator, 
and this is why a linear increase of propulsive efficiency with velocity is shown for a 
jet in Fig. 9.3b. At higher Mach numbers, this increase in the jet propulsive efficiency 
makes the jet airplane more viable, although the propulsive efficiency is still lower 
than that for the propeller-driven bombers at lower speeds. During the design of 
the B-47, the propulsive efficiency was estimated to be about 1.1 hp,h/lb, still only 
about one-half that achieved by the propeller-driven piston-engine airplanes. This 
deficiency in propulsive efficiency for the jet caused many people to feel at the time 
that a long-range strategic bomber would still have to be propeller-driven, with either 
piston engines or turboprops. 
Faced with this reality, the Boeing design team faced a challenge; their response 
was to work hard on the other terms in the range equation. Given a relatively poor 
value of V 00 / c1 in Eq. (5.152), the only other possibilities to obtain a reasonable range 
are to increase both L/ D and W0 / W1 in Eq. (5.152). Hence this is the reason for the 
high-aspect-ratio wing of the B-47, shown in Fig. 9.3a. Also, the fuel capacity was 
made large, giving the B-47 a much larger W0 / W1, as shown in Fig. 9.3c. With the 
larger L/ D and W0 / W1, the range of the B-47 was made even better than that of the 
B-17 and of the B-29; the data shown in Fig. 9.3 give the relative ranges of the B-47, 
B-29, and B-17 in the approximate ratio of 17 : 13 : 7. The design challenge had 
been met. 
9.:2.2 Design of the 707 Civil Jet Transport 
The pioneering design technology that had been accrued during the B-47 project 
evolved into the first successful civiljet transport, the Boeing 707. These tw0 airplanes 
are compared in three-view in Fig. 9.4. The design of the B-4 7 had been revolutionary; 

===== PDF PAGE 509 =====
CHAPTER 9 ® of 
Boeing B-47 
Boeing 707 
9.4 Three-views of the Boeing B-47 and 707, for comparison. 
the design of the 707 was evolutionary from the B-47. This is obvious from the 
comparison shown in Fig. 9.4. The dominant features of the 707-the 35° swept 
wing and the jet engines mounted in slung under the wing on struts-had been 
pioneered with the B-47. The major design changes reflected in the 707 were the 
low-wing to allow a long body deck for carrying passengers or freight, 
and the use of a tricycle gear. The reason for the tricycle gear was and 
because pilots were familiar with 
this type gear; it allowed 
them to lift the nose at takeoff and depress the nose at landing. 
At the time the Boeing 707 was designed, the only extant jet airliner was the 
British DeHaviliand Comet; the Comet 4 is shown in three-view in 9.5. The 
Comet was a bold move on the of the the first version, the Comet 1, 
495 

===== PDF PAGE 510 =====
496 
Figure 9.5 
PART 3 @ 
Three-view of the deHavil!and Come! 4. 
entered service with the British Overseas Airways Company (BOAC) on 2, 1952. 
It was the first jet passenger service in the world. flocked to fly the Comet; 
the were smooth because it flew at high altitudes above the worst of 
the weather, and flight times between such distant cities as London and Johannesburg 
and London and Singapore were cut almost in half. However, in 1954 the Comets 
experienced two fatal accidents. On January l O and April 8 of that year, two Comets 
virtually disintegrated at cruising altitude. The problem was structural failure near the 
comer of the nearly square windows on the fuselage, caused by repeated stress cycles 
during pressurization of the fuselage for each Once a hole appeared in the 
fuselage, the pressurized vessel would explosively decompress, causing catastrophic 
failure of the airplane. The Comets were taken out of service. DeHavilland redesigned 
the and in 1958 the Comet 4 went into service. However, by then the British 
initiative in commercial jet transports had been lost forever. Oniy 74 Comet 4s were 
built 
The designs for the Comet and the 707 were different, as can be seen by 
comparing the three-views in Figs. 9.4 and 9.5. The Comet had a moderately swept 
wing of 20° but no sweep of the horizontal and vertical tails. The engines were buried 
in the root of the which took up valuable internal wing volume that could have 
been used to store fuel. Also, with the engines buried in the wing, the wings had to be 
thick enough to accommodate the engines, hence reducing the critical Mach number 
of the wing. Hence, in no way was the 707 a derivative of the Comet-the design 
philosophies were quite different. So was the performance. The Comet cruised at 
Mach 0.74 at 35,000 ft, and the 707 cruised at Mach 0.87 at ft. The Comet 
was a much 
smaller airplane; the gross of the Comet 1 A was 1 lb with 
a wingspan of 115 whereas the gross weight ofthe Boeing 707-3208 was 
lb with a wingspan of 146 ft. The Comet had a relatively short range of 1 
which required it to make intermediate stops for 

===== PDF PAGE 511 =====
C H A P r E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
of the Boeing 707-320B is 6,240 mi. The configuration of the Boeing 707 set a model 
for many subsequent jet transport designs; in contrast, the configuration of the Comet 
had virtually no impact on future design. 
With the success of the B-47, and then later with the larger B-52, Boeing man­
agement knew it was in an advantageous position to produce the first jet airliner in the 
United States. However, the decision to go ahead with such a project did not come 
easily. The airlines were cautious, waiting to see how successful the Comet might 
be. Boeing felt that any initial orders for a new commercial jet transport would not 
be large enough to cover the development and tooling costs. This led to the idea for 
a military version to be used as a jet tanker for in-flight refueling, almost identical to 
the civil transport design. In this fashion, business from the Air Force would make up 
the start-up losses for the development of the airplane. But the Air Force dragged its 
heels on such an idea. Nevertheless, on April 22, 1952-the same year that the British 
Comet first went into airline service-Boeing management authorized the building 
of a prototype jet airliner. With that decision, the fortune and future destiny of Boe­
ing Company were forever changed. A company that 
had produced mainly military 
airplanes for most of its existence was to become the world's leading manufacturer 
of civil jet transports in the last half of the twentieth century. 
But in 1952 nobody knew this. The decision in 1952 was a bold one; the prototype 
jet transport was to be privately financed. The estimated cost of the prototype was 
$16 million. However, Boeing decided to use some of its independent research 
and development (IRD) funds, which came from prorated allotments taken from 
military contracts. These IRD funds were the government's way of providing some 
discretionary funding to companies to help them carry out their own research and 
advanced development. So the government would indirectly end up paying most of 
the cost of the prototype anyway; the direct cost to Boeing was estimated to be only 
$3 million. Boeing labeled the prototype with a company internal designation of 
367-80; the airplane was quickly to be known as the "Dash-80." 
The Dash-80 was powered by four Pratt & Whitney J-57 turbojet engines, which 
had proved to be very reliable on the B-52 bomber. The civil version of the J-57 
was designated the JT3C; each engine produced 10,000 lb of thrust. Although the 
Dash-80 was an evolutionary derivative of the.B-47, there were still some major 
design challenges. For one, the use of a tricycle landing gear in conjunction with 
a swept wing posed a problem: How would the main gear retract and be stowed in 
the swept wing? The structural design of the swept wing involved internal spars that 
were also swept, hence making it geometrically difficult for the main landing gear, 
which retracted in a line at right angles to the plane of symmetry, to be stowed in 
a convenient vacant space in the wing. The Boeing designers solved this problem 
by placing the main gear closer to the plane of symmetry and having the main gear 
retract into the bottom of the fuselage, as shown in Fig. 9.6. 
Another challenge was flight control. A well-known aerodynamic characteristic 
of swept-back wings is that the backward sw~ep induces a spanwise component of 
flow over the wing which is toward the wing· tip. Hence, the flow in the tip region 
tends to separate before that over other parts of the wing, with a consequent loss of 
control from ailerons placed near the tip. This problem had been noticed in both 
497 

===== PDF PAGE 512 =====
498 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Figure 9.6 
Unpressurized ~-c • ~ / 
-=~ -
Quarter wing - · 
chord, nominal e.g. ·~ ~ 
Pressure 
bulkhead 
Landing gear retraction geometry for the Boeing 707. (From Cook, 
Ref. 63, with permission.) 
the B-47 and the B-52, but was not dealt with in a totally acceptable way. However, 
what may have been acceptable in a military airplane was totally unacceptable for 
a civil transport. In order to provide proper and reliable lateral control, the Boeing 
aerodynamicists concentrated on that half of the wing closest to the root, where the 
spanwise induced flow was minimal and hence flow separation was not a problem. 
The control surfaces for the Dasb-80 wing are shown in Fig. 9.7; shown here is 
Boeing's innovative solution for lateral control. Sandwiched between the inboard 
and outboard flaps was an inboard aileron positioned behind the jet exhaust from 
the inboard engine. Furthermore, two sets of spoilers, inboard and outboard, were 
positioned in front of the inboard and outboard flaps. Spoilers are essentially flat 
plates that deflect upward into the flow over the top surface of the wing, "spoiling" 
that flow and hence decreasing lift and increasing drag. The combination of the wing 
upper surface spoilers and the small aileron behind the inboard engine provided the 
necessary degree of lateral control at high speeds; .the outboard aileron near the tip 
was locked in the neutral position except at low speeds with the flaps down, when the 
outboard aileron was reasonably effective. This lateral control arrangement proved 
to be quite successful on the Boeing 707. 
From a philosophical point of view; the design of the Dash-80 followed in a 
general way the intellectual process described in Chapter 7, although the distinction 
between conceptual design and preliminary design was somewhat diffused. The Dash-
80 evolved from the B-47, hence many of the fundamental configuration decisions 
that are usually made by numerous iterations in the conceptual design phase were 
not necessary; they were already in place for the Dash-80 (and hence the 707). Wind 
tunnel testing, which is usually brought in at the preliminary design phase to refine 
the configuration determined by conceptual design, played a strong role right from 
the start. The conceptual design of the B-47 itself was guided strongly by testing 

===== PDF PAGE 513 =====
Figure 9.1 
C H A PT E R 9 @ Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
Inboard spoilers 
Inboard aileron 
Outboard spoilers 
Outboard aileron 
locks in neutral 
when flaps 
are up 
Trailing-edge flap, aileron, and spoiler locations for 
the Boeing 707. !From Cook, Ref. 63, with 
permission.) 
different configurations in the tunnel. The swept-wing and podded engines were so 
new that even the basic conceptual design process for the B-47 needed data, and 
lots of them, from tunnel testing. Indeed. the Boeing high-speed tunnel was almost 
exclusively dedicated to the solution of problems with the B-47 during that airplane's 
design process. Nine months of intensive wind tunnel testing were necessary just 
during the conceptual design phase-many more tests followed in the preliminary 
and detailed design phases. 
The first flight of the Dash-80 took place on July 15, 1954. Success followed suc­
cess. The first production 707 s were delivered to Pan American Airlines in September 
1958. On October 26, the first jet service by a U.S. flag carrier was initiated when Pan 
Am flight 114 departed Idlewild Airport at 7:20 PM and landed at Paris's LeBourget 
about 9 h later, with an intermediate stop at Gander, Newfoundland, for refueling. 
(The early model 707 did not have quite the sufficient range, fully loaded, to make 
the trip from New York to Paris nonstop.) However, this was not the first transatlantic 
flight by a jet airliner. The British carrier BOAC beat Pan Am by a few weeks. On 
October 4, two redesigned deHavilland Comets, the Comet 4 (see Fig. 9.5), made 
simultaneous departures-one from Heathrow Airport in London, and the other from 
499 

===== PDF PAGE 514 =====
500 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Idlewild in New York-with full loads of passengers. Although these Comets crossed 
the Atlantic Ocean in both directions that day, the ultimate success belonged to the 
Boeing 707. Carrying 100 more passengers at 100 mi/h faster, the 707 outperformed 
the Comet 4, and it soon became the jet airliner of choice for airlines around the world. 
Also, the Air Force ordered a tanker version of the 707. Designated the KC-135, it 
became the natural airplane for air-to-air refueling of other jet airplanes. The first 
KC-135 was delivered to the Air Force in 1957. 
The 707, in its earlier and later models, was a long-range airplane seating up to 
189 passengers. It was a "hot" airplane in the sense that it had a high landing speed 
of 158 mi/h; it required a takeoff field length of 8,600 ft and a landing field length of 
5,980 ft. Hence, only large airports could accept the 707; the vast number ofregional 
airports with shorter runways were disenfranchised to jet transport aviation at the 
time. Recognizing this as a problem and an opportunity, in 1957 Boeing began the 
study of a smaller jet transport that could operate out of fields of 5,000 to 6,000 ft in 
length. Thus began the idea of the intermediate-range 727, the next Boeing success 
story. 
9.2.3 Design of the Boeing 727 Jet Transport 
As early as 1950, Boeing management had decided that the future of commercial 
transports lay in jets. With the subsequent success of the 707 jet airliner, Boeing 
embarked on a new jet transport design-the 727. This new airplane was part evolu­
tionary and part revolutionary, as we shall see. The requirements for the 727 did not 
originate with the airlines. Rather, Boeing was astute enough to see a future need for 
a jet transport with the following characteristics: 
1. Short field capacity. 
2. Maximum passenger appeal. 
3. Low direct operating.cost, which is enhanced by minimizing the time the 
airplane stays on the ground, maximizing the climb and descent rates, and 
having good reliability. 
4. Low community noise. 
5. All-weather operation. 
6. Operational flexibility and self-sufficiency. 
7. High profit potential. 
The board of directors insisted that, before embarking on the project, the company 
have orders for such an airplane from at least two major airlines. So Boeing went to 
the airlines with a concept for a sho~- to medium-range airplane; ultimately United 
Airlines and Eastern Airlines showed some interest, albeit conflicting. United wanted 
a four-engine airpfane because of its high-altitude operation at Denver; four engines 
would provide more safety in an engine-out situation. However, Eastern Airlines 
wanted a twin-engine airplane because it was more economical to operate. Boeing 
finally took the middle ground and chose to design a three-engine airplane; its studies 

===== PDF PAGE 515 =====
CHAPTER 9 ;ii fajrplanes 
had indicated that the increase in '"""'""'tir<, costs associated with 
A~•nc,ns•arl to twin '-'Hi",H!<..," t.'le increase associated with t"l.ree engines 
This nonlinear trend is shown in Fig. was small to that for four 
based on the Boeing studies. 
the first step--setting the 
based on the conviction 
to be in demand as a to the H-W\CT.r<m. 
Boeing initiated discussions with L'l.e airlines did those co,mp,an1es 
the that the of the 727. The pe1:1rnrm:a_nc:e 
for the initial version of the 727, labeled the were set as follrnu:s: 
1. Take off with full payload passengers) from a 6,000-ft-long runway at sea 
level with an ambient air ternp,ers,tu:re of 90°E 
2. Cruise at wit..h a range of nn. 
3. 
4. Catering to the of United Airlines, carry a useful payload 
from Denver (ta..\eoff ambient temperature of 90°F) to Chicago. 
5. Handle a 35-kcot crosswind for takeoff. This was more severe than that for 
and reflected the need for uninterrupted service into smaller 
The second and third pivot an estimate of the weight and design 
n,11·;,n,,,t,, ... ~ were dictated by the competing requirements for short-field 
1111,11··~,,•soecou cruise. The former requirement calls for a small 
ivc ... rn"ES, and the latter for a wing loading. However, recall that the 
and tak:eoff speeds) is given Eq. (5.67) 
u 
ci !O 
ci 
.s 
12 W / ____ _ -y p s 
0 .-=c.-----------'---~·--·~-----'--· 
2 3 4 
Number c,f engines 
9 .8 Results of a 
three and four 

===== PDF PAGE 516 =====
502 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Hence, for a given stall velocity, the wing loading can be increased as long as ( C i)max 
is increased by the same factor. The Boeing designers took this tack. They designed 
for a large wing loading and then compensated by going to measures that could almost 
be called extreme to achieve a very high (Cdmax· During the conceptual design, the 
maximum takeoff weight was taken as 142,000 lb, and the wing area was 1,650 ft2, 
giving W / S = 86. 7 lb/ft2 • (The weight of the 727 changed throughout the design 
and production process; the initial takeoff weight grew to 160,000 lb for the first 
production model.) 
The extreme measures to achieve a high ( C dmax took the form of an advanced 
high-lift system, involving triple-slotted Fowler flaps at the wing trailing edge, and 
leading-edge flaps and slats. Boeing pioneered the triple-slotted Fowler flaps, driven 
by the design requirements for the 727. These flaps are shown in Fig. 9 .9 in both their 
retracted (dashed lines) and fully extended positions. Figure 9.9a shows the inboard 
flaps, close to the fuselage, and Fig. 9.9b shows the outboard flaps. The position 
of these flaps along the span is illustrated in the wing planform views, also shown 
at the right in Fig. 9.9a and b. The triple-slotted Fowler flaps are essentially three 
separate flap surfaces which, when extended, greatly increase the effective wing area. 
The slots are gaps between each flap surface, allowing some of the higher-pressure 
air on the bottom surface to flow through the slots to the lower-pressure region on 
the top surface and delaying flow separation over the top of the flaps. The high-lift 
performance of various flap systems is shown in Fig. 9 .10, which gives the variation 
of CL versus wing angle of attack with flaps fully extended and deflected to 40°. 
Four configurations are compared; curves D and C are for single- and double-slotted 
flaps, respectively, and curves B and A are for triple-slotted flaps, with curve A for 
a slightly more extended geometry. Clearly the triple-slotted flaps (curves A and B) 
are superior to the single- and double0 slotted flaps. Also, note that the data in Fig. 
9.10 show the principal aspects of trailing-edge flaps in general, namely, to make the 
zero-lift angle of attack more negative (shift the lift curve to the left) and to increase 
~---~~:-:;,-;;__( -
Takeoff condition: 20° flap Fixed T.E. 
I 0° flap ( ref) 
~---:._-c__ 
Fixed T.E. 
Landing condition: 40° flap 
A-A 
(a) 
Flaps 20°down R 
Spoiler 
---~.-
IJ~r~-: ~ A 
Flaps 40° down ~ Wing plan view 
(b) '\ 
Figure 9.9 Flap movement and deAection for the Boeing 727: (a) inboard Rap and (b) outboard Rap. 

===== PDF PAGE 517 =====
CL 
Wind tunnel 
CHAPTER 9 ~ 
3.0 i A""- .... 
! ~. 
I /:/ 
l.O~ ·W··:·:>···· 
I "/ . ./ i, 40° Flaps 
0.51 ! 
I 
' 
-4' 0° 12° 
Wing angle of attack 
16° 20° 
9. Hi Boeing wind tunnel daia fur lifl curves for four different !railing-edge Flap 
configurations. 
( C dmax. By choosing the flap, Boeing designers were reaching for the 
best high-lift performance from any trailing-edge device-better than any 
employed trailing-edge system. (The B-47 used a single-slotted 
double-slotted The first production airplane to use a double-slotted was the 
Douglas A-26, at the end of World War 
However, more high-lift performance can be obtained by using leading-edge 
devices in conjunction with trailing-edge flaps. Boeing designers chose a combined 
leading-edge system of Kruger leading-edge flaps and leading-edge slats. The relative 
performance of these leading-edge mechanisms is shown in Fig. 9 .11, compared to 
the alternative devices of a leading-edge droop and a simple leading-edge slot. Both 
the leading-edge slat and the Kruger leading-edge flap are superior to the other two, 
as seen in Fig. 9.11. 
The generic wind tmmel results shown in Figs. 9. l O and 9 .11 were obtained by 
Boeing during a series of intensive studies on devices aimed at the 
optimum high-lift combination for use on the 727. The final arrangement of these 
devices on the 727 wing is shown in Fig. 9.12, which gives a view showing 
the inboard and outboard trailing-edge flaps, the Kruger on the inboard leading 
edge, and the slats on the outboard leading edge. Also shown in Fig. 9.12 is the 
location of the spoilers; the outboard are for lateral control at 
and the inboard are for the lift at touchdown upon This 
arrangement of is a ca.rryover from the 707 Recall that the spoilers 
can also be used the landing approach to reduce L / D and hence steepen the 
slope of the approach path. The resulting variation of CL with angle of attack 
for the 727 design is given in Fig. 9.13. This figure shows the relative role 
of trailing-edge and devices for the 727 wing. The trailing-edge flaps 
503 

===== PDF PAGE 518 =====
504 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
3.0 
2.8 
2.6 
2.4 
CL 2.2 
2.0 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
-4" O" 
Figure 9.U 
Flight 
,, .. / Large slat 
••••• Kruger 
LE flap 
LE slot 
4° 8° 12° 16° 20° 
Wing angle of attack 
Boeing wind funnel data for lift curves for four different 
leading-edge high-lift devices. 
Front spar 
Rear spar 
Landing gear door 
spoilers -F-~~~ 
Inboard 
flap 
Figure 9.12 
aileron 
Inboard 
aileron 
The wing configuration for the Boeing 727. (AIAA, with 
permission.) 
serve to push the lift curve to the left (make the zero-lift angle of attack more negative) 
compared to the case with flaps up. The leading-edge devices serve to extend the lift 
curve to a higher (Cdmax than would be available with just the trailing-edge flaps. 
The design goal during conceptual design of the 727 was to achieve a ( C dmax of 

===== PDF PAGE 519 =====
2.4 
2.0 
1.6 
CL 
wind 1.2 
tunnel 
0.8 
0.4 
Figure 9.13 
Figure 9.14 
C H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
727 Flaps (landing) 
(Triple-slotted TE flaps) 
................... _ No LE 
devices 
4' 8° 12' 16' 20' 
Wing angle of attack 
Wind tunnel data for wing lift curves for the Boeing 727, 
comparing the cases with and without the high-lift devices 
deployed. 
Streamline patterns over the Boeing 727 airfoil with and 
without high-lift devices deployed, comparing the cases for 
landing, takeoff, and cruise. (AIAA, with permission.) 
24' 
2.9. The Boeing wind tunnel data given in Fig. 9.13 showed that the design goal was 
achievable with the combination of trailing-edge and leading-edge high-lift devices. 
As a final note regarding the high-lift systems for the 727, Fig. 9.14 shows the de­
ployed configurations for landing and takeoff, as well as the corresponding computed 
505 

===== PDF PAGE 520 =====
PART 3 
attack for takeoff is l 0°, with the 
to obtain a n,,o.;,,,11,,u.1 
The angle of attack for 
obtain high lift and 
Pivot 4 in the .3--the 
process and in other respects 
process invo]ved d!rect carryovers frcm the 
707. the 727 used the same cross section for 
as the 707. T11is is shown in 9. the of the cross section above 
the floor of the passenger cabin is the same in the 707 and the 727. the 
cross section below the floor was a different 
the 727 lower section 
of the fuselage forvvard of the 
ers felt that a short- to u"-u"'""-·"''"' 
than the longer-range 707, hence the cross section below the cabin floor was 
made smaller for the 727. Because the main wheels retracted into the in 
the bottom cross section for the 727 had to 
be expanded in the to accommodate the 
cross-section sizes forward and aft for the 727. 
amount of wing sweep. The 707 
and B-52 Tne 
The 
placement of the three 
been discussed. The use of three """'"'"'0 
707 727 Aft 727 forward ar:.d 737 
9.i5 ''"'"""m'"'•" of Jhe passenger sections th~ , 727, ond 
with 

===== PDF PAGE 521 =====
C H A PT E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
the symmetry plane of the aircraft. It made no sense to strut-mount this engine above 
or below the fuselage; instead, Boeing designers chose to bury the engine in the rear 
of the fuselage, with an inlet for the engine located at the root of the vertical tail. The 
air was ducted from the inlet to the entrance of the engine through a novel S-shaped 
duct sketched in Fig. 9 .16. In regard to the placement of the other two engines, Boeing 
designers went through two major studies, one with the engines strut-mounted below 
the wing, in the time-honored style pioneered by Boeing, and the other with the engines 
mounted on the rear sides of the fuselage. The former configuration is shown in Fig. 
9.17 and the latter in Fig. 9.18. The decision was not easy. Boeing setup two separate 
competitive design teams, one to study and optimize each configuration shown in Figs. 
9.17 and 9.18. At the end of protracted and deep arguments, it was decided that there 
were advantages and disadvantages to both configurations, and that although there 
was no clearly decisive aspect, the fuselage-mounted engine configuration shown in 
Fig. 9 .18 was finally chosen. A disadvantage of this configuration was that it was more 
cumbersome to load. However, wind tunnel tests indicated a slight drag reduction 
for the fuselage-mounted aft engine configuration. Also, the aft engine configuration 
appeared to be slightly cheaper to manufacture because the auxiliary systems were 
closer together. Besides, the engine noise in the front half of the passenger cabin 
was greatly reduced when the engines were aft-mounted. However, none of these 
considerations were compelling. Nevertheless, the final choice was the fuselage­
mounted aft engine design shown in Fig. 9.18. 
In a further departure from previous Boeing practice, the horizontal tail was 
mounted on top of the vertical tail-the T tail configuration shown in Fig. 9.18. With 
the engines mounted in the rear of the fuselage, especially the third engine buried in 
the back of the fuselage, the T tail was a good choice aerodynamically, albeit requiring 
a stronger, hence heavier, structure for the tail. 
Figure 9.16 
--........................ 
Internal duct , , 
' ' ' ' ' 
[ 
The S·shaped dect from the tail inlet to the engine is buried in the end of the 
fuselage for the Boeing 727. 
507 

===== PDF PAGE 522 =====
508 
9. 11 
P·A RT 3 
arrangement studied 
a smaller version of the 707, At 
a very reasonable value. The range nPrtn,,-n·," 
where the dashed curves are 
test data. The actual range is 
9.21 
data were 
the 727 process. 
Vlere 
nu1nber of \.Vind tunnel tests. 
re:so,ec,cs the actual 
.At the source was the 

===== PDF PAGE 523 =====
c H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
Figure 9.18 The fuselage-mounted engine arrangement studied during the Boeing 727 design process; the designer's 
choice. (AIAA, with permission.) 
during the design study. Finally, the lower drag of tll.e actual airplane compared to 
the wind tunnel data used for predictions can be seen in the drag polars for the 727, 
plotted in Fig. 9.23. A number of drag polars, each for a different flap deflection, are 
shown in Fig. 9.23. For any given flap deflection, at a fixed CL, the value of CD is 
smaller for the flight data (solid curves) than for the wind tunnel data (dashed curves). 
In some cases the wind tunnel data overpredict the drag by more than 25%. 
In the design of the Boeing 727, Boeing engineers followed the general phases 
described in Section 7 .2, namely, conceptual design, preliminary design, and detail 
design. The actual design schedule for these phases is shown in Fig. 9 .24, as described 
in Ref. 64 by Fred Maxam, the Boeing chief project engineer on the 727. Note that af­
ter the general conceptual design was completed, wherein the overall configuration as 
shown in Fig. 9 .18 was determined, the preliminary design phase took less than a year. 
In October 1960, the company made the formal go-ahead decision based on the results 
of the preliminary design phase, and a commitment was made to produce the 727. 
What followed was a protracted detailed design phase (called design development 
by Boeing), leading to the first flight on February 9, 1963, with FAA certification 
awarded on December 24, 1963. During the entire design process, Boeing carried 
out over 5,000 h of wind tunnel testing, 1,500 h of which occurred during conceptual 
and preliminary design in order to predict the performance of the airplane. 
509 

===== PDF PAGE 524 =====
510 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
Figure 9.19 
16 
15 
12 
Wind tunnel results 
wing-body only 
11 '--~--''---~--'~~--'~~--' 
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 
Mach number 
Variation of the maximum of the product of the free-stream 
Moch number and lift-to-drag ratio versus free-stream Moch 
number. Comparison between the Boeing 727 and the earlier 
720. 
Altitude of 30,000 ft . 
75 - Flight results 
....... Design prediction 
70 Long-range 
65 
Nautical miles 
per 1,000 60 
lb of fuel 
Figure 9.20 
55 
50 
Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 QB Q9 
Mach number 
Range performance for the Boeing 727; comparison between 
actual Right results and the predictions mode during the 
design process. 

===== PDF PAGE 525 =====
CHAPTER 9 Ii Design of 
727 
B377 
Stratocruiser 
707-320C 
720 
367-80 
1.6 ~---~---~---~---~ 
O 10° 20' 30° 40° Full 
Trailing-edge flap angle flaps 
9.21 Variation of the stall lift coefficient {Cdmox with !he tailing-edge 
Rap deAection angle for the Booing 727. Comparison belween 
actual results and the design predictions. Also comparisons 
with other airplanes wilh deAedion are made !he 
vertical line ai the 
9.22 
7 1 Sea-level 
I 40' flaps 
on 6 I- - Certificated 
;a ~ I ....... Design 
1 I 5 ~ prediction .......... ·········i 
i ~ I ......................... . 
i:il ii 4 f-........... .. 
·=; < o3 
~ ti:: 
.::: 
:.<: 
; Oil 
u 
:'a'J 
l~ 
r~ 
1~ 
l~ 
~--~--~---'-----'IL_L__J 
100 110 120 130 140 
Gross weight (1,000 lb) 
results 

===== PDF PAGE 526 =====
1960 
Concepts 
L 
Project Oct. 
established Go 
ahead 
PA 11 T 3 
@ Configuration integration 
@ Systems axrangements 
Preliminaxy WT. tests 
@ WT balance estimates 
~ PreliminaJy layouts 
~ Cost and schedule estimates 
• Marketing studies 
• Program planning 
Phas£Js of the 
I.6 
1.2 
0.8 
0.4 
9.23 
Gear up 
Syrn1 flaps 
0.04 0.08 
1962 
0.12 0.16 
1963 
0.20 
Broke11 line indicates 
wiwJ tunnel data 
0.28 0.32 0.34 
' ,··,m=n<n<'l beiween acruai 
defiection,. 
1964 1965 
L 
Jan. 
Certifica6on 
(727-100) 
Certification 
(727-200) 
Jll Major zn.d m2nor fayouts 
& Detail drawing 
~ Equipment. specifications 
* Technology testing 
Nlockups 
Vendor coordir1ation 
® Sales support 
data 
~ FHght testing 
727. 
® Manufacturing support 
® Fleet support 
Customer changes 
Product fixes 
!N Product in1provement 
~ Sales support 
$ Cost reductions 
coordination 

===== PDF PAGE 527 =====
CHAPTER 9 ® Design of Jet-Propelled 
TI1etl:1ree considered in this section are good examples of subsonic/tra.qsonic 
1 
is a sum_rnary of the and characteristics 
s 
b (ft) 
AR 
Wo (lb) 
Voo (mi/h) 
Range (mi) 
Takeoff distance to ciear 35-ft obstacle (ft) 
Landing distance from 50-ft height (fl) 
Service ceiling (ft) 
R/ Cat sea level (ftimin) 
V,tall (flaps down) (mi/h) 
W/S 
T/W 
B-47 
l,428 
116 
9.43 
206,700 
606 
4,100 
40,500 
145 
0.21 
707 727 
2,400 1,560 
130 108 
7.04 7.5 
257,000 160,000 
623 632 
4,650 2,690 
10,550 7,800 
6,320 4,910 
31,500 36,500 
l,400 2,900 
128 114 
107 103 
0.21 0.26 
One of the most intellectual results obtained from the design of any 
a list of "lessons learned"--exoerience that can be to 
summarizes in Refs. 64 and 65 
of the 
he itemizes: 
element of success is to listen closely to what the 
as her or his requirements and to have the will and to 
2. /ui airline is as good as its economics-its cost per seat-mile, its 
to its passengers and the resultant load factor and its return on 
investment to its airline owner. 
These lessons kamed are not ne,t:ei,san 
to the of a successful and hence are 
this book. On 
follows: 
Steiner continued with his lessons learned as 
add 
4. it may mean the 

===== PDF PAGE 528 =====
PART 3 @ 
5. 
Steiner addressed the 
6. 
7. 
8. Significant, or even 
>10't,1,,v,nu lower-cost 1rn2rnua,u,.u 
A very close 
is essential. 
within reach 
program and a constai.,t customer 
""'""'·""'"''""] considered from 
n:1:au1ta1.rn;d, not avoided. 
(LID) at 
(max 
config) 
(Takeoff coofig) 
9.:25 
B-47 
l3 .. 52 
1.8 l.78 
9.7 
2.79 2.55 2.45 
10.0 10.Q 1L7 
l:h47 

===== PDF PAGE 529 =====
C H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
less costly) mechanical high-lift system,· following lesson learned number 5 listed 
earlier. In the process, Boeing is accepting a lower wing loading for the 767 to partly 
compensate for the lower (CL )max. Based on maximum takeoff weight, W / S = 145 
lb/ft2 for the 747 compared to W/S = 131 lb/ft2 for the newer 767. This trend is 
continuing with Boeing's newest jet transport, the 777, which also uses a simpler 
single-slotted trailing-edge flap and has an even lower wing loading of 126 lb/ft2. 
This trend is being driven by cost considerations. 
Finally, the evolution of wing design for subsonic jet bombers and transports is 
shown in Fig. 9.26. Note the similarity in sweep angles-all in the 32° to 37° range. 
Alsd note the higher aspect ratios for the jet bombers compared to the civil transports 
shown in Fig. 9.26; the civil transports have aspect ratios on the order of 7.0 to 7.5, 
except for the more recent 767 which has a somewhat h1gher aspect ratio of 7.9. In 
the quest for improved aerodynamic efficiency, Boeing designers have gone to higher 
aspect ratios for their more recent designs. For example, the 777 has an aspect 
ratio 
of 8.68, getting closer to the high aspect ratio of the B-47, which started the entire 
line of Boeing jet airplanes in the first place. Somehow, this is a fitting end to this 
section, which started with a discussion of the B-47. 
Area Aspect Sweep 
(ft2) ratio (c/4) 
B-47 ~ 
B-52~ 
1,428 9.43 35° 
4,000 8.55 35° 
367-80 ~ 2,400 7.0 35° 
707-320 ~ 2,892 7.35 35° 
727-200 ~ 
747200A 
767-200 ~ 
1,560 7.5 32° 
5,550 7.0 37.5° 
3,050 7.9 31.5° 
Figure 9.26 The evolution of wing planforrn design, from the Boeing B-47 to 
the 767. 
515 

===== PDF PAGE 530 =====
516 
figure 9.27 
P A fl i 3 il:l Airplane Design 
9.3 SUBSONIC JET AIRPLANE DESIGN: 
CONSIDERATIONS 
The design philosophy set forth in Chapter 7 calls for an al.most immediate first 
estimate of the gross weight of the airpla..,e, as noted in pivot point 2 in 
Chapter 8 we illustrated how this estimation could be made for a onJm:ue:r-<m'ven 
airplane; the procedure is no different for a jet-propeHed However, the 
database given in Fig. 8.1 used for the estimate of W, / is for propeller-
driven airpla.-ies. A similar database for subsonic jet airplanes is given in Fig. 9.27. 
Unlike t.11.e data in Fig. 8.1, which allowed us to m::tke a choice of W0 = 
independent of the value of W0, the data in Fig. 9.27 show a decreasing trend for 
We/ W0 as W0 becomes larger. For lighter jet airplanes with gross weights on the 
order of 10,000 to 20,000 lb, W0 is on the order of 0.6, whereas for heavy 
transports and bombers, We/Wo is more on the orderof0.45. Of course, there is some 
scatter in the data shown in Fig. 9 .27. T'ne dashed line drawn through this scatter in 
Fig. 9.27 can be used for a first estimate of We/ Wo. Note that the dashed line is not 
horizontal, as was the case in Fig. 8.1. The estimation of for airplane can be 
carried out using the same approach as discussed in Section 8.3. However, because 
We/ W0 is a function of W0 , the estimation of requires an iterative approach, as 
noted, but not executed, in Section 8.3. 
Variation of the ratio of empiy weigh! io gross with the gross for subsonic iet 

===== PDF PAGE 531 =====
CHA?TER 9 ~ of 
of the airframe 
For conventional 
aspect of 
trnrt,"lr-er.nn;,c,.,,,u,.,,vu propellers flowing 
is a consideration in the calculation of 
a driver that determines the location, 
shape, and orientation of the nor is the design 
of the airframe shape influenced ::he propellers, To some extent, rhe location of 
engine nacelles on the wing--how far forward of the edge the front of the 
nacelle is and how centered the nacelle is in the vertical direction relative 
to the airfoil section-has an influence on the nacelle drag, as studied in the 1930s. 
However, for the design of airplanes, the and the airframe 
are usually treated as distinct there is little reason to be concerned with 
airframe-propulsion integration in the trne sense of that term. 
rn.1te.2:ra1t10n becomes a more serious design 
consideration, for subsonic jets, for supersonic jets, and 
essential for future hypersonic airplanes. Since this section deals with subsonic jets, 
we win limit our comments here to such 
For subsonic jet airplanes, the engine and airframe can still treated as some-
what distinct entities. However, the following should be considered in the 
conceptual design process. 
If the jet engine is buried inside the fuselage, care shouid be taken to provide good-
quality flow into the inlet. flow means flow that has relatively uniform 
properties entering the inlet with as a total pressure as possible. layer 
flow by this standard is the are 
and the viscous shear stresses decrease the total pressure. Hence it is 
not to place the inlet at a location where it will 
from another of the airplane. 
been used for design. One is the nose such as used on the 
Republic F-84, shown in Fig. 9.28. Here the inlet is as far forward as it can be. 
It essentially ingests the free-stream which is of quality. this 
flow must pass through a relatively the fuselage to get to the engine 
mounted at the center rear of the airplane, with consequent frictional losses and hence 
losses in total pressure. To decrease these internal flow losses, the duct to the engine 
can be made shorter putting the inlets farther back on the fuselage, one on each 
side of the airplane. Side-mounted inlets were used for the Lockheed F-80, the first 
U.S. operational fighter, shown in Fig. 9.29. such side-mounted 
inlets decrease the internal duct length to the 
the boundary layer that builds 
up along the the promotes poor-quality flow into the 
engine duct. this can be mitigated the inlet slightly away 
from the fuselage surface so that the layer passes between the fuselage and 
the inlet. A of side inlets that flow to a single engine is that 
the flow path is between the two inlets, and pressure instabilities may arise that 
cause the engine to stalL There are other considerations associated with the internal 
such as their and the volume occupy inside the So the 
517 

===== PDF PAGE 532 =====
518 
-@--
Figure 9.28 
PART 3 • Airplane Design 
-iti * , 
-@-
a 0 
'.! 
Republic F-84. Figure 9.29 Lockheed P-80 (F-80). 
choice between side inlets and nose inlets is not entirely clear-cut. As usual in the 
design process, compromises occur and decisions have to be made based on such 
compromises. 
Recall that Boeing designed the 727 fuselage inlet at the rear of the fuselage, 
mounted on the top just ahead of the vertical stabilizer. The inlet was connected to 
the engine via an S-shaped duct, shown in Fig. 9 .16. The proper design of an S-shaped 
duct is a challenge in aerodynamics, so as to avoid flow separation and consequent 
total pressure losses and nonuniform flow going into the engine. 
For multiengine subsonic jet planes, the airframe-propulsion integration problem 
is usually treated in one of two ways. One is to bury the engines in the wing root 
region. This approach was followed particularly by the British, and the Comet airliner 
(Fig. 9.5) is a good example. An advantage of this approach is that the total wetted 
surface area of the airplane can be reduced compared to installations that require 
pods, struts, or any other type of separate inlet cowl. However, a disadvantage is that 
the wing must be thicker to accommodate the engines, hence causing a lower critical 
Mach number. Also, valuable space inside the wing is taken up that could otherwise 
be devoted to fuel tanks. The second installation is the pod configuration, already 
described in Section 9.2. We have already discussed how Boeing engineers learned 

===== PDF PAGE 533 =====
CHAPTER 9 @ of 
to locate the relative to the such that there was no 
interference between the two. engines have very short inlet ducts, and 
of almost uniform flow. the inlets are 
""' ine 
details Of CllnPr~()t11 r 
design. 
same, as we will see. 
Almost all the 
m 
DESIGN 
different from that of subsonic flow­
and day. This causes many of the 
to be different from those for subsonic airplane 
as discussed in 7 is essentially the 
is the Concorde 
to date are military airplanes; the 
UvcH~ll.vU during the 1960s 
and still in commercial service. Because of the strong flavor on supersonic 
su;,uccF,••c the design case histories of 
The first is the General Dynamics (now Lockheed-Martin) 
This is followed the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird recon-
the 
in the 
we examine the of the most advanced fighter (at 
the 
LockJ1eed-Martin F-22. 
to rolling off the pro­
the last half of the twentieth 
<'IJSJlQ.CPo•H0 have shown that the tag on a new 
the year 2020 would take the entire of the Defense Department of 
the Air Force initiated a project in the 
fighter. The requirements for 
stated, and are summarized 
The intent of the contract was to demonstrate the of a highly maneuverable, 
a prototype design, fabrication, and flight test 
was to maximize the usable maneuverability and 
the air combat arena within the constraint that system cost, 
nn,riP•n>'l!u considered and balanced. Emphasis was to be 
,wP·rn,nn,~n,,t design techniques. The performance goal 
'"'"'l""'""'Y in the 0.8-1.6 Mach combat arena. 
was one of the companies 
was labeled the YF-
to this 
Ultimately, two rmnt,,hrne·~ 
the design was selected 
A three-view of the F-16 is 

===== PDF PAGE 534 =====
520 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
After the requirements for the airplane are established, the next step is the initial 
weight estimate (pivot point 2 in Fig. 7.3). As usual, historical data are very useful 
for this weight estimate. Such data for supersonic airplanes are shov:n in Fig. 9.31, 
which is the usual plot of We/ W0 versus Wo. As in the case of the subsonic jet 
F-l6A 
figure 9.30 General Dynamics (now Lockheed-Mortin) F-16. 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
w, Wo 0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
104 I 
I 
\ 
figure 9.31 
10s 
Wo (lb) 
Variation of the ratio of en'lply weight to gross weight with the gross weight for supersonic jet airplanes. 

===== PDF PAGE 535 =====
shovvn in 
the 
HAPTER 9 
shown 
process follows 
is a function of 
and small size for the F-16 was 
ciriven 
'The size the 
This can be seen in the discussion 
and 'iVhere the turn radius is shown to decrease and the 
turn rate is shovvn to increase "0/hen the load factor is increased. For a 
level turn. the rnaxirnum allo"Nable load factor 
increases '\\'ith an increase in the 
in terms of energy considerations for accelerated 
3 _ The s1na1ler the 
·~~cw'"''"' the size and 
the smaller the total cost of 
the smaller the radar cross section for detection. 
of stealth 
n,,v,Y>LHHF', to Buckner et al. 
of the mission 
force equal to cruise range in the 
In other 
criteria of maximum tum rate, minimum turn 
excess power rather than more conventional criteria such as 
and size were dictated 
S, aspect ratio 
shown in 

===== PDF PAGE 536 =====
522 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
1.05 
Start 
combat 
weight 
ratio 
1.00 
0.98 '--'-------'-------'------'------'------' 
55 
I 
2.5 
I 
30 
I o'.i 
0.035 
Figure 9.32 
60 65 70 WIS 
I I I 
3.0 3.5 4.0 AR 
I I I 
35 40 45 ALE 
I 
o'.3 J o'.4 I 0.2 A 
I 
0.040 0.045 0.050 tic 
Resutls of a parametric study during the F-16 design process. Start combat 
weight ratio versus wing loading, aspect ratio, wing sweep angle, taper 
ratio, and thickness-to-chord ratio. 
the weight at start of combat is greater than the baseline value. Everything else being 
equal, a start combat weight ratio less than unity represents an improvement over the 
baseline value. Figure 9.33 is in the same vein; here the time to accelerate through a 
given velocity increment and the turn rate, both normalized by the baseline, are plotted 
as a function of the five wing parameters. The turn rate is shown for M00 = 0.8 and 
1.2. In Fig. 9.33, when the acceleration time ratio is less than unity and the turn rate 
ratio is greater than unity, the performance is better than the baseline. 
For pivot point 4 in our design philosophy-the configuration layout-the wing 
shape and size for the F-16 were directly influenced by the previous parametric studies. 
Examining Figs. 9 .32 and 9 .33, the taper ratio).. should be as small as practical, limited 
by reasonable structural strength at the tip and early tip stall. The F-16 designers 
choose)..= 0.227. The baseline aspect ratio of 3 was chosen, since it minimized the 
start combat weight ratio and the acceleration time ratio. Increasing the wing sweep 
was favorable, especially for increasing the turn rate at supersonic speeds; clearly the 
reduction of supersonic wave drag by increasing the sweep angle enhances accelerated 
performance. However, from Fig. 9.32, if A is made larger than about 43°, the start 
combat weight ratio increases. For the F-16, a sweep angle of 40° was chosen. In 
regard to the wing thickness ratio, an increased t / c results in a more lightweight 

===== PDF PAGE 537 =====
0 '.:l 
"' ... 
"' -~ 
Cl 0 
·.:i 
El 
~ 8 < 
0 
·~ 
"' .':l 
"' '"' 
~ 
C H A P T E R 9 111 Design of Jet-Propelled 
Lt 
I 
WIS 
I \ 
][ l 
' ' /A 
I ',,, ~AR I 
I A~-~ ' . tic-:. ---1.0 I ',~· I ', ............ I , ......... _~ 
I l ---~ _j 0.9 
l.l~ M0.8 ..-AR 
I I 
.,,./'" 
./' I 
I ................... / 
I ... ... , 
1.0 i tic ==• =""'~... ----:---, ;, /' ........ -11. . 
I 
.... _ --
0.91 
/' ----- WIS 
l.l M 1.2 
tic---. 
l.O ;:_::;. 
0.9 
55 60 65 70 WIS 
I I I I 
2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 AR 
I I I I 
Au, 30 35 40 45 
I I I I 
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 )\ 
I I I I 
0.035 0.040 0.045 0.050 tic 
9 .33 Results of a parametric study during !he F-16 design 
process. Acceleration lime ratio and rum rate ratio 
versus the same parameters as in Fig. 9.32. 
airplane (the wing structural design is easier for thicker wings and results in a lighter 
wing). However, supersonic turn rate is improved with a smaller t / c. The balance 
between subsonic and supersonic maneuverability, consistent with flutter and aileron 
reversal considerations, resulted in a choice of t / c = 0.04. Finally, increasing the 
wing loading resulted in a lighter airplane with larger acceleration, but decreasing the 
wing loading increased ilie turn rate, For minimizing the airplane weight, an optimum 
of W / S = 68 lb/ft2 is indicated in Fig. 9.32. However, choosing a lower value of 
W / S = 60 1b/ft2, only a l % increase in combat weight was incurred while obtaining 
523 

===== PDF PAGE 538 =====
PART 3 
a beneficial 4% increase in subsonic turn rate. Such is the essence of the 
TI1e of the F-16 v,1as carried 0ut f~~r -~ 
The airfoil section for the F-16 vvas chosen after a series of wind tunnel tests 
\Vere canied out biconvex 
a subsonic 
in mission radius and a 13% increase in subsonic turr;, rate, 
it decreased the turn rate 3% and decreased 
The N,6,CA 64A204 airfoil was chosen for the F-16 
design. 
amined two classes of configuration: 
a blended ~"''·'""-u"" 
improving directional and increasing the to1ret,o,ctv lift. The normal cross­
sectional area distribution of the F-16 is shown in 9.35. This shows the relative 
area contributions of different of the . ., .. ,-·-··-~ and indicates a rather smooth total 
and The area 
rule for transonic drag, as discussed in Section calls for a smooth 
variation of the normal cross-sectional area of the ~m;,,cmv 
at speeds, but here the relevant croSS··Sectional area is not that oero,:cn<Cll<;u-
lar to the free-stream relative but rather the area section cut an 
at the free-stream Mach the distribution of this 
distance along the fuselage is shown in Fig. 9.36 for both 
the smoothness of these area distributions. 
In regard to airframe-propulsion ""'·"!<-'"""vu, 
based on simplicity-a normal shock inlet. 
Plan form 
blending 
9.34, Schematic 

===== PDF PAGE 539 =====
Figure9.35 
Figure 9.36 
C H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
Fuselage 
(above W.L. 80) 
Fuselage station 
Transonic area ruling for the F-16. Variation of normal 
cross-sectional area as a function of location along .the fuselage axis. 
1.6M Oblique 
Fuselage station 
Supersonic area ruling for the F-16. Variation of oblique 
cross-sectional area as a function of location along the 
fuselage axis. Comparison between the actual area 
distribution and that propased in an early design study. 
525 

===== PDF PAGE 540 =====
PART 3 @ 
the inlet is not at the nose of the airplane; underneath 
the fuselage more than one-quarter of the downstream of the nose. 
Wind tunnel tests indicated that with the inlet underneath the 
provided a shielding 
effect for the inlet which was beneficial at the 
attack that wouid be encountered during dogfighting. The rearward 
inlet was to allow as short a duct to the engine as thus 
fuselage weight ( a savings of 11b was obtained per linear inch of duct 
There was also a synergistic effect With the duct in a more forward p--·,,··~"• 
was an increased directional destabilization which would have 
heavier) vertical tail. With the more rearward inlet there was a reduction 
of the destabilization effect, and the vertical tail was made 
additional weight. In the design of the F-16, the duct was made the 
absolute minimum consistent with flow into the engine. 
On April 14, 1972, the Air Force awarded contracts to General Dynarn.ics and 
Northrop to build two prototypes each of a lightweight fighter; the YF-16 was the 
General Dynamics design, and the Northrop candidate was labeled the YF-17. Over 
the next 20 months, General Dynamics completed the,_,,.""'"-'"''= 
phases, and the first of the two YF-16 prototypes was rolled out of the 
December 13, 1973. On 20, 1974, during one of the 
the al.I-moving horizontal tail was damaged, and the test 
hence, the first flight of the F-16 was unscheduled. The official first 
took place on February 2, 1974. By February 5, it had flown 
a competitive fly-off program between the YF-16 and YF- on 
the Air Force announced that the winner was the F-16. The first ""'"""'"'""' 
the F-16A, entered active service with the Air Force on January 6, 1979. Since then, 
more than 4,000 F-l 6s in various versions have been Pr<)m1ce,a. 
The airplane has gone through many design modifications since its 
ceptual design discussed above; as expected, among these was a growth in 
The maximum weight at which the prototype YF-16 was flown was 
maximum takeoff weight of the F-16C is 42,300 lb with full external fuel tanks and 
ordnance. The performance capability of the F-16 is a maximum level at 
ft of above Mach 2, a service ceiling of more than ft, and a radius of 
depending on external stores, of between 230 and 850 mi. 
As a final note in our discussion of the F-16, the has been very long-lived. 
At the time of writing, it was almost 15 years ago that the YF-16 made its first 
Today, the F-16 is still in production. This is a example of the of 
modem airplane designs, in contrast to the 1930-1940 period when large numbers of 
new airplane designs were surfacing every year, and the effective lifespan of a 
airplane was closer to 5 years than 25 years. More about this will be 
said in the Postface at the end of this book. For the F-16, even the manufacturer's 
name has changed, not once but twice, its production On March L 
1993, the Tactical Military Aircraft Division of General at Fort 
Texas, which has designed and manufactured the Lockheed and 
became Lockheed Fort Worth Company. Two years Lockheed was 
Martin-Marietta, becoming Lockheed-Martin '--'V""'"" 
General Dynamics F-16. Today, it lives on as the '--'V"'"-"""~,.,--,,,,u F-16, 

===== PDF PAGE 541 =====
C H A PT E R 9 111 Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
9 .4.2 Design of the Blackbird 
The historical development of the airplane has always been dominated by the quest 
for speed and altitude. In this section, we will highlight the design 
case history of 
the F-12/SR-71 series of aircraft, an airplane that holds boti.1-1 the maximum speed and 
maximum altitude records for a production and in-service flying machine. Named 
the Blackbird, this airplane set a speed record of 2,070.1 milh at 80,258 ft on May 
1, 1965, at a Mach number of 3.14. Although still classified, it is rumored that the 
Blackbird can exceed Mach 3.3, Because the Blackbird represents the epitome of 
supersonic airplane design today, we include it in our overall discussion of supersonic 
aircraft. 
A three-view of the YF-12A and a side view of the SR-71 are shown in Fig. 9.37. 
The airplane was designed and built by the Lockheed "Skunk Works," an elite, small 
design group that has operated with great autonomy outside of the normal adminis­
trative organization of Lockheed Aircraft Company. The Skunk Works is legendary 
for a series of novel, innovative airpiane designs since World WaI U. Operating in 
a shroud of secrecy, this design group has produced such pacesetting airplanes as 
the very high-altitude subsonic U-2 reconnaissance airplane in the 1950s and the 
super-secret Fl 17 stealth fighter in the late 1970s. Led by Clarence "Kelly" Johnson 
SR-7l 
YF-!2A 
The Lockheed YF-12A/SR-71 Blackbird. 
527 

===== PDF PAGE 542 =====
PART 
until 1975, and Ben Rich between 1975 and 
One of the basic 
in the 
t.11.e characteristics of 
bird. 'There for the 
B1ackbird--the desired characteristics ivere so far advanced beyond those of 
any other aircrnft In Johnson's words "I believe I can say 
on the aircraft from rivets and materials and power 
had to be invented from scratch." The associated with the 
Blackbird was later stated 
The Blackbird, which dominated our work in the sixties, was the greatest 
of the twentieth century. about this airplane's 
"""""'"'~ that had to be overcome, the political 
even the of the Air Force's most skilled 
stn1tm,ph,ere. Kelly Johnson 
of his years at the Skunk Works' 
helm. All of us who shared in its creation wear a of special Nothing 
cte:ag11ec! and built in the world, before or since the 
Blackbird, can effectiveness, and Had we 
built Blackbird in the year 2010, the world would still have been awed such an 
achievement. But the first modd, ~~"',,, .. -~ and built for the CIA as the successor to 
the U-2, was test-flown as as 1962. Even that fact seems nothing 
less man miraculous. 
,_,"~'"'"·"111.1.stemmed ofahydrogen-
the Skunk Works in the late 1950s. The brainchild of 
than Mach 2. The 
to be insurmountable-the sm.pA<<Uw 
and even so it could not achieve the desired range 
Johnson !'"''· ""'""'' j 
used conventional. fuels and conventional ,,u;y,,,..,,,,, 
any Russian rriissHe. Since the Skunk Works had "'"·"-",H'-''-' 
,,a;µaaJ!s;:; of sustained 
at extension. The first """'"'·=···= 
the A-1 for internal Lockheed reference. Twelve 
be SatlSHlCHJl'Y 

===== PDF PAGE 543 =====
C H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
existence of the YF-12A was publically announced by President Lyndon B. John­
son on February 29, 1964, and later that year, on July 24, the President revealed the 
reconnaissance version, designated the SR-71. 
To the present time of writing, many aspects of the Blackbird are still classified. 
However, enough is known about the design of the airplane that we can cast it in light 
of the design philosophy discussed in Chapter 7. 
To begin with, weight was always a major concern, as in all the airplane designs 
we have examined in this book. Aluminum had been the metal of choice for previous 
jet airplanes, but at the Mach 3 conditions for the Blackbird, the aerodynamic heating 
was so severe that the surface temperatures of the Blackbird exceeded that beyond 
which aluminum lost its strength. Stainless steel could withstand the heat, but it was 
heavy. This led to the pioneering use of titanium for the Blackbird; titanium was as 
strong as stainless steel, but was half its weight. Most importantly, titanium could 
withstand the surface temperatures to be encountered at sustained Mach 3 speeds. 
Although there were tremendous problems with the machining and availability of 
titanium, eventually 93% of the structural weight of the Blackbird was built of ad­
vanced titanium alloys. It is estimated that the takeoff gross weight of the YF-12A is 
over 140,000 lb, and its empty weight is about 60,000 lb. This data point is included 
in Fig. 9 .31; although it falls slightly below the data, the value of We/ Wo = 0.43 for 
the Blackbird is still quite "conventional" for supersonic jet airplanes. 
Since speed, altitude, and range were the primary performance goals for the 
Blackbird, high values of L/ D and W / S were important. The wing area was chosen 
as 1,800 ft2, which gives a maximum wing loading of 77.8 lb/ft2• The variation 
of (L/D)max with M00 is shown in Fig. 9.38. Here we see an example of how 
dramatically the aerodynamic characteristics of an airplane change when going from 
12 
0 
0 
~ 
-
0.5 
-
\. 
1.0 
e.g. @25%c 
-
1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 
Mach number 
Figure 9.38 Variation of the trimmed maximum lift-to-drag 
ratio as a function of free-stream Moch number 
for the Blackbird. 
529 

===== PDF PAGE 544 =====
!'ART 3 0 
subsonic to the value of 
divergence/wave drag effects at On the other 
value of = 6.5 at Mach 3 is reasonable for a su1Jers0111c 
Another aspect that dramatically changes when the 
subsonic to supersonic speeds is the center neutral of the 
airplane. Recall that the aerodynamic center of a flat plate theoretically is at the 
quarter-chord subsonic flow, but moves to the for su1per·so1mc 
flow. An airplane going through Mach 1 experiences a similar shift in the aP.1ror,vr1anrHc 
center. The variation of the neutral for the YF-12A with is Fig. 
9.39. This figure also illustrates one of the beneficial aspects of a design 
feature of the Blackbird, namely, the use of chines along the fuselage. Returning 
to Fig. 9.37, the chines are essentially stra.l.ces extending forward of the wing 
leading edge along the fuselage, but are much more integrated with the fuselage than 
the conventional strakes, as can be seen in the front view in Fig. 9 .37. For the YF- l 2A, 
the chines stop at the canopy location, so as not to interfere with the nose radome. 
However, for the SR- 71, the chines extend aH the way to the nose, giving the fuselage a 
"cobralike" appeara..'lce. The d1ines have several important aerodynamic advantages. 
For one, they tend to decrease the travel of the neutral as M 00 is increased. This 
is dearly seen in Fig. 9.39, where there is an almost 35% rearward shift of the neutral 
point for the case witi'1 no compared to the much more limited travel of the 
neutral point when chines are included. is this more limited travel of the neutral 
point an advantage? Recall that, for static longitudinal the neutral point must 
be located beliind the airplane's center of gravity. The normalized distance between 
the center of gravity and the neutral is called the static A positive 
static margin exists when the point is behind the center of which as 
stated earlier is necessa.ry for static The 
© Rigid airplane ®CL= 0.l 75 (untrimmed) ~ 2° Nose till 
'° I 
u 40
1,..., __ _,__ __ _,,I _,,a_ : Chine on I 
s( ' - I 
~30~- -L-~ 
~ ' _/ I II I I 
l 20~ r+-
1 
I I 1 1~ ~~ 1 
~ JO 1· __ L 1 ~~--1 
i ! I 
1 • I '1 
, I ' O I -'-----I ___ _L __ ~---
! 
Chine off 
0 0.5 LO L5 2.0 2.5 3.0 
Mach number 
9.39 Shilt 
$Ubsonk: to 

===== PDF PAGE 545 =====
CHAPTER 9 
too much of a positive static 
is not good, because the will be too stable for maneuvering and win 
elevator deflection to tiim the airplane because of Lhe distance 
and the center of This results in a trim drag which 
hence 
solution to this problem. 
'"'v"''""o"' of chines at supersonic speeds is the favorable 
sU1'UH'v<U '"'''-"'"'° at a small yaw 
of Fig. 
side force. In contrast, ti.11e blended chine-body cross 
section shown at the bottom of 9.40 shows an crossflow, with a much 
lower side force- In this way t.'1e chines are beneficial in for directional 
Tb.is has a because the vertical tail surface can be made 
Crnssflow 
and skin-friction drag. 
the of two different 
~nn,,,·~crm,0 mis-
at subsonic sp-"'.,eds, 
to obtaining satis­
characteristics. In essence, a supersonic 
crossArrH si're(1mlinet over a 
u blended ch~ne$. 

===== PDF PAGE 546 =====
532 P A R T 3 ® Airplane Design 
airplane is designed for double duty-reasonable flight characteristics at both sub­
sonic and supersonic speeds. This is a compeHing reason to choose a highly swept 
delta wing-high sweep to minimize supersonic wave drag, but a delta planform for 
satisfactory low-speed performance. The design choice for the Blackbird was a delta 
wing with 60° sweep. 
The low-speed aerodynamic characteristics of a delta wing are discussed in Sec­
tion 2.8.1. In particular, Eq. (2.25), repeated below, is an approximate expression 
for the variation of low-speed normal force coefficient with angle of attack for delta 
wings. 
C ( 
\ l.7 
__ N_ - 2n ..:::_ ' .:1 9 ..:::_) 
(S / /) 2 - T .. S / f [2.25] 
In Eq. (2.25), s is the semispan, l is the length, and a is the angle of attack in radians. 
For the 60° swept wing of the Blackbird, s / l = sin(90° - 60°) = 0.5. Let us use Eq. 
(2.25) to calculate the lift coefficient at an angle of attack of 10°. From Eq. (2.25), 
with a= 10° = 0.1745 rad, and hence a/(s/ l) = 0.349, 
CN = (0.5) 2 [2n(0.349) + 4.9(0.349)1- 7] 
= (0.5) 2(2.1932 + 0.8187) = 0.753 
Hence, the lift coefficient is 
CL= CNCOSot = (0.753)(0.9848) = 0.742 
For the designers of tJ1e Blackbird, the above calculation was optimistic because in 
the configuration layout the engines were placed on the wings (see Fig. 9.37), with a 
consequent decrease in the lifting power of that of the wings. On the other 
hand, the chined fuselage provided some additional lift at angle of attack. Measured 
values of CL from wind tunnel tests of the Blackbird are shown in Fig. 9.41, along 
l.2 
LO 
Eq. (2.25) 
0.8 
~ 
w"" o.6 
'---+~--s----·-·.L....._,_L 
0 13 12 16 20 
a (deg) 
9.41 Wind runnel re5ulis fur lhe 1ow··so,eoo 
!llockbird. wilh one 

===== PDF PAGE 547 =====
C TE R 9 of 
with the calculated result from Note that the lift curve does not 
zero, but rat.her shows a small nrss,;,,,,,, zero-lift 
at a small wc,1<,,uv,;, 
effective 
These results have a strong effect on 
As discussed in Section 2.8. 
attack, on the order of 30° to 40°. This 
Blackbird; the would have his or her 
gear struts would have to be very 
of attack for c;n,nrc><>f'h 
= 0.37. 
lb is 
for a 
is less 
,----
/ 2W 
y 
effect, CL is increased at a fixed 
effect, increased to above 0.5, 
the can slow down at touchdown. 
we see that the 
for the Blackbird. 
533 

===== PDF PAGE 548 =====
534 p A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
-- Takeoff 
JO .-----~---~---~----- Landing 
0 ._ ____________________________________ __ 
60 80 100 120 140 
Gross weight (1,000 lb) 
300 
MR;~~- -------- Liftoff 
.. --i------- ----h;;wn ----- 'foUC 
100 
60 
Figure 9.42 
80 100 120 140 
Gross weight (1,000 lb) 
Takeoff and landing performance for the Blackbird. 
To = 1 + y -1 M2 
Too 2 oo 
160 
160 
where T 00 is the ambient static termperature and y is the ratio of specific heats y = 
cp/cv. For air below a temperature of 1500° R, y = 1.4. At M00 = 3.3, we have 
To 2 
- = 1 + 0.2(3.3) = 3.18 Too 
At 80,000 ft, T00 = 390°R, hence To= (3.18)(390) = 1240°R = 779°F. This is 
essentially the temperature encountered at the leading edges and inside the inlet of 

===== PDF PAGE 549 =====
C H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
the Blackbird-a temperature hotter than the average soldering iron. The wing and 
fuselage encounter surface temperatures on the order of 450° to 500°F-hotter than 
the maximum available in a household oven. These surface temperatures dictated the 
use of titanium rather than aluminum for the airplane's skin and internal structure, as 
already mentioned. To handle the aerodynamic heating, two measures were taken. 
The fuel was used as a heat sink, to precool the hot compressor bleed air for the air 
conditioning for the cockpit, and then the hot fuel was fed directly to the engine. 
Also, radiative cooling of the surface was used. Recall that a surface at a temperature 
T radiates thermal energy which is given by 
ER= EaT 4 
where ER is the rate of radiative energy emitted per unit area, a is the Stefan­
Boltzmann constant, and Eis the emissivity which varies from Oto l. The higher the 
emissivity, the more the surface is cooled by radiation. This is the reason why the 
Blackbird is painted a very dark blue-black color, to inc:i:ease the emissivity and hence 
the radiative cooling. Even though the paint added close to an extra 100 lb to the air­
plane, it lowered the wing temperature by 35°F, allowing the use of a softer titanium 
alloy and hence improving the manufacturing processes for the airplane. Here is yet 
another design compromise-trading weight for an increase in manufacturing ease, 
something very important when titanium is being used. 
The Blackbird has all-moving vertical tails, with no rudder surfaces. An investi­
gation of conventional rudders early in the conceptual design stage showed that very 
large rudder deflections would be required to balance an engine-out condition. This 
was considered an inadquate control authority. Moreover, at such large rudder deflec­
tions, the rudder hinge line exposed to the flow would encounter a large stagnation 
temperature, causing local aerodynamic heating problems. The solution to both these 
problems was to dispense with rudders and use all-moving vertical tails. Although 
all-moving horizontal tails (equipped also with elevators) had been used as early as 
1947 (e.g., on the Bell X-1 and the North American F-86), the use of all-moving 
vertical tails (without rudders) for the Blackbird appears to be an innovative first. 
The vertical tails were also not vertical. Figure 9.43 shows the front view of the air­
plane with the orientations of the vertical tails, one with the tails exactly vertical and 
one with the vertical tails canted inward byi a 15° angle. When there is a side force 
on the vertical tail, the center of pressure on the tail is above the longitudinal axis 
through the center of gravity, hence causing a rolling moment about that axis. This is 
shown in Fig. 9.43. By canting the tails inward, the side force acts through a smaller 
moment arm, hence reducing the rolling moment. The final design configuration of 
the Blackbird incorporated the canted vertical tails, as seen in Fig. 9.37. 
The Blackbird is powered by two Pratt & Whitney J-58 bleed bypass turbojet 
engines, especially designed for use on this airplane. Each engine produces more than 
30,000 lb of thrust at sea-level static conditions. The engine also uses a special low­
vapor-pressure hydrocarbon fuel called JP-7. The combined inlet-engine combination 
is an interesting example of airframe-propulsion integration in the following sense. 
The inlet is an axisymmetric spike inlet, with a center cone that translates forward and 
backward. The location of the spike is automatically changed during flight to maintain 
535 

===== PDF PAGE 550 =====
Small rolling moment 
Large rolling moment 
9.43 Effect of vertical stabilizer coni on momeni. 
the optimum shock wave location on the edge of the inlet hence stdving for 
minimum The inlet-engine nacelle is also designed for effective bleeding of the 
layer on both the spike and the outside of the inlet, in order to enhance the 
of the internal fl.ow and stabilize the airflow The airflow in the 
for both low speed (takeoff) and speed 3+ are sketched in 
9.44. In the low-speed case, the forward of the spike allows the entering 
subsonic air to pass through a passage, thus the air inside the inlet. 
In the high-speed case, the more rearward position of the spike allows the entering 
supersonic air to pass through a convergent-divergent passage, thus slowing the air 
inside the inlet 
However, what is most interesting about this inlet-engine arrnngement is the 
breakdown of where the thmst is from-a type of th.i--ust budget that is shown 
in Fig. 9.45. TI1is figure is somewhat to the generic sketch shown in Fig. 
3 .1 Oe, which shows the amount of thrust each section of the engine. 
In Fig. 9.45, the inlet-engine combination is divided into four as sketched at 
the top of the The percentage of the thrust each section is plotted 
versus speed, from low-speed subsonic to high-speed Mach 3+ crnise. Recall that the 
thrust of each section is due to the integration of the pressure distribution over that 
section. A negative percentage contributes a percentage contributes 
thrust Section 0--1 is the forward of the conical and the pressure 
distribution there will produce drag, as shown the curve labeled 0--1 in 
9.45. In contrast, section ~-2 includes the back end of the 
distribution there will always create a force in the forward air·ec1t101!1, 
thrust the percentage of the thrust in section 1-2 increases with 
Mach and this section almost 70% of the total thrust at 

===== PDF PAGE 551 =====
C H A P T E R 9 @ Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
. Bypass 
doors open 
Secondary 
bypass doors dosed 
(a) Low speed 
Centerbody 
bleed Suck-in doors dosed 
Spike fully 
retracted 
/ 
Bypass doors 
closed. Open as 
required to position 
shock or restart inlet. 
Secondary 
bypass doors 
normally closed 
(b) High speed 
Tertiary 
doors closed 
\ 
Ejector 
flaps closed 
r 
Ejector flaps 
full open 
Figure 9.44 Nacelle airAow: (a) low speed at takeoff and (b) high speed al cruise. 
{AIM, with permission.) 
Section 2-3 is the engine itself--<:ompressor, burner, turbine, and nozzle. Finally, 
section 3-4 is the ejector for both the primary flow through the engine core and the 
bleed air external to the core. It is intersting to note that, at Mach 3+, the engine 
core itself produces only about 17% of the total thrust. The rest of the thrust is 
produced by the aerodynamics of the nacelle, especially in section 1-2. Quoting 
Kelly Johnson (Ref. 69): "My good friends at Pratt & Whitney do not like me to 
say, that at high speeds, their engine is only a flow inducer, and that after all, it is 
the nacelle pushing the airplane." This phenomenon is not a unique characteristic 
of just the Blackbird; for any very high-Mach-number airplane of the future, such 
as scramjet-powered (supersonic combustion ramjet) hypersonic aircraft, the inlet 
will produce most of the thrust. This simply increases the importa.'1ce of proper 
airframe-propulsion integration for such airplanes. 
531 

===== PDF PAGE 552 =====
538 P A R T 3 • Aiiplane Design 
% Propulsive 
thrust 
(FN - Dinlet) 
80 
60 
2 _ 3_;----.. MaxAIB ,,-
................... ,,..,,."' 
40 
+20 
........................ ,..,," ......... .,,,,.,. _ ... __ 
------ ................. -- .. --- -~---1-21------ ------------- ',, 3-4;-------
O-l;------------------------
-20 '--~~~~~~~-----"'--~~~~~~~~-'-~ 
Subsonic 
loiter 
Figure 9.45 
Climb 
speed 
High 
speed 
Contribution of various parts of the engine lo the 
generation of thrust for the Blackbird. 
Finally, we note that although stealth (low radar cross section) was not a driving 
aspect of the design of the Blackbird, it certainly was a consideration. The canted 
vertical tail surfaces tend to reflect incident radar beams away from the receiver, hence 
reducing the radar cross section. Also, when the blended chines were added (Fig. 
9.40) to an otherwise cylindrical forebody, the radar cross section dropped by 90%; 
the chines turn the bottom of the fuselage into an almost flat surface which also reflects 
incident radar beams away from the receiver. Hence the Blackbird had a strong flavor 
of stealth considering the time at winch it was designed. 
In conclusion, the YF- l 2A/SR-71 Blackbird series of aircraft incorporated many 
unique design features never seen before on an operational aircraft. The design of 
this aircraft points the way for the design of future very high-Mach-number airplanes. 
9.4.3 Design of the Lockheed F-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter 
With this section, we end our discussion of the design of supersonic airplanes. We 
will highlight the design of the Lockheed-Boeing-General Dynamics (now Lockheed­
Martin) F-22, which represents the most recent supersonic airplane design at the time 
of writing. Because of the newness of the F-22 and the high military classification 
still surrounding the airplane, less is known in the open literature about its design 
characteristics. However, enough information is available to piece together some 
aspects of its design philosophy. A four-view (including top and bottom views) of 
the F-22 is shown in Fig. 9.46. 
Pivot point 1 in our design philosophy-establishing the requirements-was 
carried out by the Air Force in 1984 when the Advanced Tactical Fighter System 
Program Office at Wright Field in Dayton, Ohio, issued the following specifications 

===== PDF PAGE 553 =====
C H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
Figure 9.46 Four-view of the Lockheed-Martin F-22. (AIAA, with permission.) 
for a new, advanced, tactical fighter: 
Radius of action: 800 mi 
Supersonic cruise: Mach 1.4 to 1.5 
Gross takeoff weight: 50,000 lb 
Takeoff length: 2,000 ft 
Unit cost: No more than $40 million 
The Air Force issued concept definition studies to seven manufacturers, with the 
idea of assessing on paper seven different designs. However, in May 1986, it was 
decided to make the final choice of the manufacturer on the basis of a prototype fly-off 
between the two top designs (much in the same vein as the fly-off that resulted in 
the choice to produce the F-16). These two top designs were from Lockheed, with 
General Dynamics and Boeing as partners, and from Northrop. Lockheed's airplane 
was designated the YF-22, and Northrop's entry was the YF-23. The Northrop YF-23 
was the first to fly, getting into the air in September 1990. The YF-22 first flew in 
October 1990. After a lengthy series of flight tests for both airplanes, the Lockheed 
YF-22 was announced as the winner on April 23, 1991. 
During the design of the YF-22, the target gross weight of 50,000 lb was missed; 
the gross weight grew to 58,000 lb, a normal trend in airplane design. The empty 
weight of the YF-22 was 31,000 lb, giving a value of We/ Wo = 0.534. This data 
point is shown in Fig. 9.31; it falls very close to the dashed curve faired through the 
data. As for other designs before, the designers of the F-22 could ha..ve used such 
historical data to make an initial weight estimate. 
The design of the F-22 did not follow the trend of faster and higher; its function 
was not to better the YF-12/SR-71 discussed in the previous section. Rather, the 
539 

===== PDF PAGE 554 =====
540 P A R T 3 • Airplane Design 
comparatively low specified cruise Mach number of 1.4 to 1.5 was a recognition 
of a turnaround in supersonic fighter design, where speed was recognized as not as 
important as maneuverability and agility. Also, stealth capability was becoming of 
paramount importance; if the airplane is essentially invisible to radar, then how fast 
it can fly is not quite so important. 
A major design feature which enhanced both maneuverability and stealth was the 
use of two-dimensional (in contrast to the standard axisymmetric) exhaust nozzles 
from the two jet engines; moreover, the two-dimensional nozzles could be tilted up 
or down to vector the thrust in the plane of symmetry of the aircraft. This feature is 
particularly useful for high-angle-of-attack maneuvers. A simple sketch comparing 
an axisymmetric nozzle with a two-dimensional nozzle is shown in Fig. 9.47. The 
F-22 is the first production airplane to use two-dimensional, thrust-vectoring exhaust 
· nozzles. The thrust vectoring is made all the more powerful by the two Pratt & 
Whitney Fl 19-PN-100 advanced-technology turbofan engines, capable of a combined 
thrust at sea level of 70,000 lb. This gives the F-22 a thrust-to-weight ratio greater 
than 1: T/Wo = 70,000/58,000 = 1.2. 
The designers of the F-22 chose a diamond planform wing with a taper ratio of 
0.169 and a leading-edge sweep of 42° (see Fig. 9 .46). The use of computational fluid 
dynamics (CFO) expedited the configuration design. (See Ref. 21 for an introduction 
to computational fluid dynamics and its use in design.) For example, the airfoil section 
for the F-22 was custom-designed using CFO; it is a biconvex shape with a thickness­
to-chord ratio of 0.0592 at the wing root and 0.0429 at the wing tip. The wingspan is 
Axisymrnetric exhaust nozzle 
1\vo-dimensional exhaust nozzle 
Figure 9A7 Schematic of an axisymmetric 
exhaust nozzle and a 
two-dimensional exhaust 
nozzle. 

===== PDF PAGE 555 =====
c H A P T E R 9 • Design of Jet-Propelled Airplanes 
44.5 ft, and the planform area is 840 ft2, giving an aspect ratio of 2.36. The choice of 
a low aspect ratio is driven by the supersonic performance (the supersonic wave drag 
is reduced by reducing the aspect ratio). The wings have full-span leading-edge flaps. 
The vertical tails are canted outward by 28° and incorporate conventional rudders. 
The vertical tails are all-moving, slab "taileron" surfaces. 
More than 19,000 h of wind tunnel time was invested in the design of the YF-22. 
These tests were instrumental in obtaining preflight predictions of the performance of 
the YF-22. Such preflight predictions were requested by the Air Force in early 1990 
so that they could be compared with actual test flight data to be obtained later that 
year. Although the detailed comparisons are classified, the flight tests carried out in 
late 1990 provided the following results (Ref. 71). 
1. Supersonic cruise was as predicted. Maximum level speed at 30,000 ft was 
M00 = 1.58; with afterbuming, it was M00 = 1.7. 
2. Up to M00 = 0.9, the subsonic drag was as predicted. 
3. Supersonic drag for low angle of attack was as predicted. (Insufficient flight 
data were obtained for comparison at high angles of attack at supersonic · 
speeds.) 
4. The drag rise at transonic speeds was lower than predicted. 
5. Specific excess power was as predicted. 
6. Range at all test conditions was within 3% of predictions (which means that 
L / D values were well predicted). 
7. Maximum speed was as predicted and was achieved in flight on December 28, 
1990. 
8. Maximum roll rates were smaller than predicted, and time to specific bank 
angles at subsonic and supersonic speeds was larger than predicted, but was 
judged to be satisfactory. 
9. Flying qualities at high angles of attack (above 20°) were judged to be excellent 
with the use of thrust vectoring. 
10. The ( C dmax was higher than predicted. 
The detailed design and manufacturing processes that led to the first production 
F-22 were lengthy, taking 6 years. The high technology embodied in the design is 
partly responsible. Even the materials were of an advanced mix; the F-22 structure is 
35% composite material, 33% titanium, 11 % aluminum, 5% steel, and the other 16% 
miscellaneous materials. Finally, the rollout of -the first production F-22 occurred in 
April 1997. The first flight of this production airplane was on September 7, 1997, 
lasting 58 min at altitudes of 15,000 to 20,000 ft, speeds up to 300 mi/h, and angles 
of attack during maneuvers of up to 14 °. 
The F-22 is considered to be the best fighter airplane anywhere in the world for 
the beginning of the twenty-first century. At the time of writing, at leasi 480 airplanes 
are anticipated to be manufactured. 
541 

===== PDF PAGE 556 =====
PA T 3 
subsonic characteristics to allow safe and reasonable 
nnc,,c·,,n,,u- flow is so different from the 
between what is 
Some of the charn.cteristics and-"'---- .. ,,-,--~ 
airplanes are as follows: 
1 L, 
increase in 
hence 
2. The center of pressure the """""'"""' 
"'"·"'''""'-"'l.J rearward when it accelerates from subsonic This 
challenge for proper and control characteristics of 
and where 
Blackbird that it dictated the material the -·o•p·--··­
and its exterior color 

===== PDF PAGE 557 =====
POSTFACE 
At the end of Skunk Works (Ref. 68), Ben Rich, vice president of Lockheed and 
director of the Skunk Works from 1975 to 1991, has the following to say: 
In my years at Lockheed I worked on twenty-seven different airplanes. Today's 
young engineer will be lucky to build even one. The life cycle of a military airplane is 
far different from the development and manufacturing of anything else. Obsolescence 
is guaranteed because, outside of a secret, high-priority project environment like the 
Skunk Works, it usually takes eight to ten years to get an airplane from the drawing 
board into production and operational. Every combat airplane that flew in Operation 
Desert Storm in 
1991 was at least ten to fifteen years old by the time it actually proved 
its worth on the battlefield, and we are now entering an era in which there may be a 
twenty- to thirty-year 
lapse between generations of military aircraft. 
The purpose of this book is to present the fundamental aspects of airplane per­
forma..'1ce and to discuss and illustrate the philosophy of airplane design. However, in 
light of Rich's comments, what is the likelihood that you will ever have a chance to 
in the design of a new airplane? It is a fact that the number of new airplanes 
uco,,,1c,,.,ccu in a given year has decreased dramatically from the literally hundreds per 
year in the heyday of the 1930s to a very few per year today, and this is counting 
the design of a new variant of an existing aircraft, such as the design of the Boeing 
747-400 as distinct from the earlier 747-200 version. The reasons for this situation are 
straightforward. First, modem military and civilian airplanes incorporate a level of 
sophisticated technology that was undreamed of 50 years ago, and it takes great effort, 
tremendous expense, and much time to design new, high-technology airplanes. See-
the cost of a new airplane today, even after the cost of development is subtracted, 
is considerably more than that of 50 years ago. So it is no surprise that the number 
of new airplane designs today is far smaller than that of 50 years ago. Compensating 
for this, and perhaps as a consequence, the lifespan of major airplanes today is 
on the order of 30 years, in contrast to just a few years for the average airplane from 
the 1930:s. An extreme example is the Boeing B-52, designed and first built in the 
early 1950s; today, the B-52 is still in service as the primary 
strategic bomber for the 
Air Force, and the Air Force is projecting that it will continue in service well into the 
""'~"'"-"''"~' century, at least until 2035-which would be a service life of 80 years! 
So again we ask: What is the likelihood that you will ever get a chance to participate 
in the of a new 
I believe the answer is, of chances. First, even though the number of 
major high-technology for new, but rather conventional civilian aircraft is 
the activity requires more people for longer periods, hence increasing 
your to participate in such designs. Second, and here is some real ex-
citement, the vistas for new, upconventional airplane designs are expanding rapidly 
at the time of For a whole new class of vehicles-micro air 
543 

===== PDF PAGE 558 =====
Postface 
vehicles-is coming on the scene. These are ultra-miniature airplanes, with wing 
spans usually less than 15 cm, for purposes of detailed reconnaissance for 
and law enforcement agencies. "mechanical birds" or "mechanical insects" 
that fly through hallways, poking axound comers, by windows. These micro 
air vehicles pose dramatic new challenges in design. The is 
totally different-very low Reynolds numbers. The rniniature power 
and stability, and flight management (avionics) are all different. 
Another class of flight vehicles, one that is both old and new but which has a 
spectacular new future, is uninhabited air vehicles airc 
planes have been used since World Wm: I at different times and 
serious use as battlefield reconnaissance vehicles began in 1982 when the Israelis 
employed them successfully in the Lebanon conflict. Until these flight ve-
hicles were designated as RPV s, and they were, for the most overgrown model 
airplanes (e.g., with 6-ft wingspans). However, these have now become a subclass of 
a much larger array of pilotless vehicles under the designation of UAV s. In addition 
to short-range tactical reconnaissance, new UAVs are now being designed for very 
high-altitude, long-endurance strategic intelligence missions. These are fuH-size air­
planes. For example, the Teledyne Ryan Global Hawk has a of 116 ft, and 
the Lockheed-Martin/Boeing Dark Star spans 65 ft, both designed for u,~;u-cuL""'"'"' 
high-endurance flight Another subclass of UAVs is uninhabited combat air vehicles 
(UCAVs), full-size pilotless aircraft designed for strike and fighter roles. There are 
several advantages of using pilotless aircraft for combat By the pilot, space 
and weight are saved, which has a synergistic benefit that the airplane can be ~"'M'"·-·, 
hence reducing drag. Also, the airplane can be made much more maneuverable; a 
9-g maneuver is the maximum that a human pilot can endure without 
and even that for only a few seconds, whereas without the pilot the 
designed for 25-g n:aneuvers and better. Another advantage of air-
planes in combat is tha; much more aggressive tactics can be 
otherwise not be used if a i)ilot's life hung in the balance. 
Other new airplane designs win push the frontiers of flight in the ,w,,,,,,v-n 
tury. New supersonic airplanes for commercial use-a new generation of 
transport and supersonic executive general aviation airplanes-will very appear 
in the first decade of the new century. And the dream of hypersonic airplanes will be 
pursued, although most likely for military rather than for commercial purposes. 
So a final word to you. Yes, aeronautical engineering has m,,trn,,,.r1 
nautical engineers of the past have done their 
progress. However, there is much yet to do and to The second 
of flight will be full of interesting design challenges. Indeed, if you you will 
have the opportunity to participate in the design of new a.,d many more 
than just one. I hope that you will find the experience of this book to have 
been rewarding when you press on to these new design challenges. If this book has 
helped to give you insight into airplane and the philosophy of -'·~"-·-
design, then I can rest easy. My task is done. Yours is beginning. 
John D. ~n(1er·so1n, Jr. 

===== PDF PAGE 559 =====
appendi.x. 
A 
Standard Atmosphere, SI Units 
Altitude 
hG,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kg/m3 
-5,000 -5,004 320.69 1.7761 + 5 1.9296 + 0 
-4,900 -4,904 320.03 1.7587 1.9145 
-4,800 -4,804 319.38 1.7400 1.8980 
-4,700 -4,703 318.73 1.7215 1.8816 
-4,600 -4,603 318.08 1.7031 1.8653 
-4,500 -4,503 317.43 1.6848 1.8491 
-4,400 -4,403 316.78 1.6667 1.8330 
-4,300 -4,303 316.13 1.6488 1.8171 
-4,200 -4,203 315.48 1.6311 1.8012 
-4,100 -4,103 314.83 1.6134 1.7854 
-4,000 -.4,003 314.18 1.5960 + 5 1.7698 + 0 
-3,900 -3,902 313.53 1.5787 1.7542 
-3,800 -3,802 312.87 1.5615 1.7388 
-3,700 -3,702 212.22 1.5445 1.7234 
-3,600 -3,602 311.57 1.5277 1.7082 
-3,500 -3,502 310.92 1.5110 1.6931 
-3,400 -3,402 310.27 1.4945 1.6780 
-3,300 -3,302 309.62 1.4781 1.6631 
-3,200 -3,202 308.97 1.4618 1.6483 
-3,100 -3,102 308.32 1.4457 1.6336 
-3,000 -3,001 307.67 1.4297 + 5 1.6189 + 0 
-2,900 -2,901 307.02 1.4139 1.6044 
-2,800 -2,801 306.37 1.3982 1.5900 
-2,700 -2,701 ~05.72 1.3827 1.5757 
-2,600 -2,601 305.07 1.3673 1.5615 
545 

===== PDF PAGE 560 =====
546 Appendix A 
Altitude 
ha,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kg/m3 
-2,500 -2,501 304.42 1.3521 1.5473 
-2,400 -2,401 303.77 1.3369 1.5333 
-2,300 -2,301 303.12 1.3220 1.5194 
-2,200 -2,201 302.46 1.3071 1.5056 
-2,100 -2,101 301.81 1.2924 1.4918 
-2,000 -2,001 301.16 1.2778 + 5 1.4782 + 0 
-1,900 -1,901 300.51 1.2634 1.4646 
-1,800 -1,801 299.86 1.2491 1.4512 
-1,700 -1,701 299.21 1.2349 1.4379 
-1,600 -1,600 298.56 1.2209 1.4246 
-1,500 -1,500 297.91 1.2070 1.4114 
-1,400 -1,400 297.26 1.1932 1.3984 
-1,300 -1,300 296.61 1.1795 1.3854 
-1,200 -1,200 295.96 1.1660 1.3725 
-1,100 -1,100 295.31 1.1526 1.3597 
-1,000 -1,000 294.66 1.1393 + 5 1.3470 + 0 
· -900 -900 294.01 1.1262 1.3344 
-800 -800 293.36 1.1131 1.3219 
-700 -700 292.71 1.1002 1.3095 
-600 -600 292.06 1.0874 1.2972 
-500 -500 291.41 1.0748 1.2849 
-400 -400 290.76 1.0622 1.2728 
-300 -300 290.11 1.0498 1.2607 
-200 -200 289.46 1.0375 1.2487 
-100 -100 288.81 1.0253 1.2368 
0 0 288.16 1.01325 + 5 1.2250 + 0 
100 100 287.51 1.0013 1.2133 
200 200 286.86 9.8945 + 4 1.2071 
300 300 286.21 9.7773 1.1901 
400 400 285.56 9.6611 1.1787 
500 500 284.91 9.5461 1.1673 
600 600 284.26 9.4322 1.1560 
700 
700 283.61 9.3194 1.1448 
800 800 282.96 9.2077 1.1337 
900 900 282.31 9.0971 1.1226 

===== PDF PAGE 561 =====
Standard Atmosphere, SI Units 547 
A!timde 
ha,m h,m Temperature T, K Pr\1!tlSure p, N/m2 Density p, kglm3 
l,000 1,000 281.66 8.9876 + 4 1.1117+0 
l,100 l,100 281.0l 8.8792 !.!008 
1,200 1,200 280.36 8.7718 l.0900 
1,300 !,300 279.71 8.6655 1.0793 
l,400 1,400 279.06 8.5602 l.0687 
1,500 l.500 278.41 8.4560 1.0581 
1,600 l.,600 277.76 8.3527 1.0476 
1,700 
1,700 277.l 1 8.2506 1.0373 
1,800 1,799 276.46 8.!494 1.0269 
1,900 l,899 275.81 8.0493 l.0167 
2,000 1,999 275.16 7.950! + 4 l.0066 + 0 
2,100 2,099 274.51 7.8520 9.9649- l 
2,200 2,199 273.86 7.7548 9.8649 
2,300 2,299 273.22 7.6586 9.7657 
2,400 2,399 272.57 7.5634 9.6673 
2,500 2,499 271.92 7.4692 9.5696 
2,600 2,599 271.27 7.3759 9.4727 
2,700 2,699 270.62 7.2835 9.3765 
2,800 2,799 269.97 7.1921 9.2811 
2,900 2,899 269.32 7.1016 9.1865 
3,000 2,999 268.67 7.0121 + 
4 9.0926- 1 
3,100 3,098 268.02 6.9235 8.9994 
3,200 3,198 267.37 6.8357 8.9070 
3,300 3,298 266.72 6.7489 8.8153 
3,400 3,398 266.07 6.6630 8.7243 
3,500 3,498 265.42 6.5780 8.6341 
3,600 3,598 264.77 6.4939 8.5445 
3,700 3,698 264.12 6.4!06 8.4557 
3,800 
3,798 263.47 6.3282 8.3676 
3,900 3,898 262.83 6.2467 8.2802 
4,000 3,997 262.!8 6.1660 + 4 8.1935 - l 
4,100 4,097 261.53 6.0862 8.1075 
4,200 4,197 260.88 6.0072 8.0222 
4,300 4,297 260.23 5.9290 7.9376 
4,400 4,397 259.58 5.8517 7.8536 

===== PDF PAGE 562 =====
Appendix A 
Altitude 
ha,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kgtm3 
4,500 4,497 258.93 5.7752 7.7704 
4,600 4,597 258.28 5.6995 7.6878 
4,700 4,697 257.63 5.6247 7.6059 
4,800 4,796 256.98 5.5506 7.5247 
4,900 4,896 256.33 5.4773 7.4442 
5,000 4,996 255.69 5.4048 + 4 7.3643 - 1 
5,100 5,096 255.04 5.3331 7.2851 
5,200 5,196 254.39 5.2621 7.2065 
5,400 5,395 253.09 5.1226 7.0513 
5,500 5,495 252.44 5.0539 6.9747 
5,600 5,595 251.79 4.9860 6.8987 
5,700 5,695 251.14 4.9188 6.8234 
5,800 5,795 250.49 4.8524 6.7486 
5,900 5,895 249.85 4.7867 6.6746 
6,000 5,994 249.20 4.7217 + 4 6.6011-l 
6,100 6,094 248.55 4.6575 6.5283 
6,200 6,194 247.90 4.5939 6.4561 
6,300 6,294 247.25 4.5311 6.3845 
6,400 6,394 246.60 4.4690 6.3135 
6,500 6,493 245.95 4.4075 6.2431 
6,600 6,593 245.30 4.3468 6.1733 
6,700 6,693 244.66 4.2867 6.1041 
6,800 6,793 244.01 4.2273 6.0356 
6,900 6,893 243.36 4.1686 5.9676 
7,000 6,992 242.71 4.1105 + 4 5.9002 - I 
7,100 7,092 242.06 4.0531 5.8334 
7,200 7,192 241.41 3.9963 5.7671 
7,300 7,292 240.76 3.9402 5.7015 
7,400 7,391 240.12 3.8848 5.6364 
7,500 7,491 239.47 3.8299 5.5719 
7,600 7,591 238.82 3.7757 5.5080 
7,700 7,691 238.17 3.7222 5.4446 
7,800 7,790 237.52 3.6692 5.3818 
7,900 7,890 236.87 3.6169 5.3195 
8,000 7,990 236.23 3.5651 + 4 5.2578 - l 
8,100 8,090 235.58 3.5140 5.1967 

===== PDF PAGE 563 =====
Standard Atmosphere, SI Units 549 
Altitude 
hG,m h, ni Temperntu:re T, K Pressure p, N!m2 Density p, kgtm3 
8,2C-O 8,189 234.93 3.4635 5.1361 
8,300 8,289 234.28 3.4135 5.0760 
8,400 8,389 233.63 3.3642 5.0165 
8,500 8,489 232.98 3.3154 4.9575 
8,600 8,588 232.34 3.2672 4.8991 
8,700 8,688 231.69 3.2196 4.8412 
8,800 8,788 23 l.04 3.1725 4.7838 
8,900 8,888 230.39 3.1260 4.7269 
9,000 8,987 229.74 3.0800 + 4 4.6706 - l 
9,100 9,087 229.09 3.0346 4.6148 
9,200 9,187 228.45 2.9898 4.5595 
9,300 9,286 227.80 2.9455 4.5047 
9,400 9,386 227.15 2.9017 4.4504 
9,500 9,486 226.50 2.8584 4.3966 
9,600 9,586 225.85 2.8157 4.3433 
9,700 9,685 225.21 2.7735 4.2905 
9,800 9,785 224.56 2.7318 4.2382 
9,900 9,885 223.91 2.6906 4.1864 
10,000 9,984 223.26 2.6500 + 4 4.1351 - 1 
10,100 10.084 222.61 2.6098 4.0842 
10,200 10,184 221.97 2.5701 4.0339 
10,300 10,283 221.32 2.5309 3.9840 
10,400 10,383 220.67 2.4922 3.9346 
10,500 10,483 220.02 2.4540 3.8857 
10.600 10,582 219.37 2.4163 3.8372 
10,700 10,682 218.73 2.3790 3.7892 
10,800 10,782 218.08 2.3422 3.7417 
10,900 10,881 217.43 2.3059 3.6946 
!l,000 10,981 216.78 2.2700 + 4 3.6480 - 1 
11,100 11,081 216.66 2.2346 3.5932 
l l.200 11,180 216.66 2. 1997 3.5371 
li,300 11,280 216.66 2.1654 3.4820 
11,400 11,380 216.66 2.1317 3.4277 
11,500 ll,479 216.66 2.0985 3.3743 
11.600 l l,579 216.66 2.0657 3.3217 
1,700 11,679 216.66 2.0335 3.2699 

===== PDF PAGE 564 =====
550 Appendix A 
Altitude 
ho,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kg/m3 
11,800 11,778 216.66 2.0018 3.2189 
11,900 11,878 216.66 l.9706 3.1687 
12,000 11,977 216.66 l.9399 + 4 3.1194-l 
12,100 12,077 216.66 l.9097 3.0707 
12,200 12,177 216.66 l.8799 3.0229 
12,300 12,276 216.66 l.8506 2.9758 
12,400 12,376 216.66 l.8218 2.9294 
12,500 12,475 216.66 l.7934 2.8837 
12,600 12,575 216.66 l.7654 2.8388 
12,700 12,675 216.66 l.7379 2.7945 
12,800 12,774 216.66 l.7108 2.7510 
12,900 12,874 216.66 l.6842 2.7081 
13,000 12,973 216.66 l.6579 + 4 2.6659- 1 
13,100 13,073 216.66 l.6321 2.6244 
13,200 13,173 216.66 1.6067 2.5835 
13,300 13,272 216.66 l.5816 2.5433 
13,400 13,372 216.66 l.5570 2.5036 
13,500 13,471 216.66 l.5327 2.4646 
13,600 13,571 216.66 -l.5089 2.4262 
13,700 13,671 216.66 l.4854 2.3884 
13,800 13,770 216.66 l.4622 2.3512 
13,900 13,870 216.66 l.4394 2.3146 
14,000 13,969 216.66 l.4170 + 4 2.2785 - 1 
14,100 14,069 216.66 l.3950 2.2430 
14,200 14,168 216.66 1.3732 2.2081 
14,300 14,268 216.66 1.3518 2.1737 
14,400 14,367 216.66 1.3308 2.1399 
14,500 14,467 216.66 1.3101 2.1065 
14,600 
14,567 216.66 l.2896 2.0737 
14,700 14,666 216.66 l.2696 2.0414 
14,800 14,766 216.66 l.2498 2.0096 
14,900 14,865 216.66 l.2303 l.9783 
15,000 14,965 216.66 l.2112 + 4 l.9475 - 1 
15,100 15,064 216.66 1.1923 l.9172 
15,200 15,164 216.66 1.1737 l.8874 
15,300 15,263 216.66 1.1555 l.8580 

===== PDF PAGE 565 =====
Standard Atmosphere, SI Units 551 
Altitude 
ho,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kg!m 3 
15,400 15,363 216.66 l.1375 !.8290 
15,500 15,462 216.66 1.1198 l.8006 
15,600 15,562 216.66 l.1023 l.7725 
15,700 15,661 216.66 l.0852 l.7449 
15,800 15,761 216.66 l.0683 l.7178 
15,900 15,860 216.66 l.0516 l.6910 
16,000 15,960 216.66 l.0353 + 4 l.6647 - l 
16,lOO !6,059 216.66 1.0192 1.6388 
16,200 16,159 216.66 i.0033 1.6133 
16,300 16,258 216.66 9.8767 + 3 1.5882 
16,400 16,358 216.66 9.7230 l.5634 
16,500 16,457 216.66 9.5717 l.5391 
16,600 16,557 216.66 9.4227 l.515 I 
16,700 16,656 216.66 9.2760 J..4916 
16,800 16,756 216.66 9.1317 l.4683 
16.900 16,855 216.66 8.9895 l.4455 
17,000 16,955 216.66 8.8496 + 3 l.4230-1 
17,100 17,054 216.66 8.7!19 1.4009 
17,200 17,J.54 216.66 8.5763 l.3791 
17,300 17,253 216.66 8.4429 l.3576 
17,400 17,353 216.66 8.3115 l.3365 
17,500 17,452 216.66 8.1822 l.3157 
17,600 17,551 216.66 8.0549 1.2952 
17,700 17,651 216.66 7.9295 l.2751 
17,800 17,750 216.66 7.8062 1.2552 
17,900 17,850 216.66 7.6847 J .2357 
18,000 17,949 216.66 7.5652 + 3 l.2165 - l 
18,100 18,049 216.66 7.4475 1.1975 
18,200 18,148 216.66 7.3316 1.1789 
18,300 18,247 216.66 7.2175 l.1606 
18,400 18,347 216.66 7.1053 !.1425 
18,500 18,446 216.66 6.9947 1.1247 
18,600 18,546 216.66 6.8859 l.1072 
18,700 18,645 216.66 6.7788 l.0900 
18,800 18,745 216.66 6.6734 l.073 l 
18,900 18.844 216.66 6.5696 1.0564 

===== PDF PAGE 566 =====
552 Appendix A 
Altitude 
ha,m 11,m Temperature T, K ~urep,N/m 2 Deruiity p, 
19,000 18,943 216.66 6.4674 +? 1.0399 - l 
19,100 19,043 216.66 6.3668 1.0238 
19,200 19,142 216.66 6.2678 1.0079 
19,300 19,242 216.66 6.1703 9.9218 - 2 
19,400 19,341 216.66 6.0744 9.7675 
19,500 19,440 216.66 5.9799 9.6156 
19,600 19,540 216.66 5.8869 9.4661 
19,700 
19,639 216.66 5.7954 9.3i89 
19,800 19,739 216.66 5.7053 9.1740 
19,900 19,838 216.66 5.6166 9.0313 
20,000 19,937 216.66 5.5293 + 3 8.8909- 2 
20,200 20,136 216.66 5.3587 8.6166 
20,400 20,335 216.66 5.1933 8.3508 
20,600 20,533 216.66 5.0331 8.0931 
20,800 20,732 216.66 4.8779 7.8435 
21,000 20,931 216.66 4.7274 7.6015 
21,200 21,130 216.66 4.5816 7.3671 
21,400 21,328 216.66 4.4403 7.1399 
21,600 21,527 216.66 4.3034 6.9197 
21,800 21,725 216.66 4.1706 6.7063 
22,000 21,924 216.66 4.0420 + 3 6.4995 - 2 
22,200 22,!23 216.66 3.9174 6.2991 
22,400 22,321 216.66 3.7966 6.1049 
22,600 
22,520 216.66 3.6796 5.9167 
22,800 22,719 216.66 3.5661 5.7343 
23,000 22,917 216.66 3.4562 5.5575 
23,200 
23,116 216.66 3.3497 5.3862 
23,400 23,314 216.66 3.2464 5.2202 
23,600 23,513 216.66 3.1464 5.0593 
23,800 23,711 2i6.66 3.0494 4.9034 
24,000 23,910 216.66 2.9554 + 3 4.7522 - 2 
24,200 24,108 216.66 2.8644 4.6058 
24,400 24,307 216.66 2.7761 4.4639 
24,600 24,505 216.66 2.6906 4.3263 
24,800 24,704 216.66 2.6077 4.1931 
25,000 24,902 216.66 2.5273 4.0639 

===== PDF PAGE 567 =====
Standard Atmosphere, SI Units 553 
Altitude 
hc;,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kg/m3 
25,200 25,100 216.96 2.4495 3.9333 
25,400 25,299 217.56 2.3742 3.8020 
25,600 25,497 218.15 2.3015 3.6755 
25,800 25,696 218.75 2.2312 3.5535 
26,000 25,894 219.34 2.1632 + 3 3.4359 - 2 
26,200 26,092 219.94 2.0975 3.3225 
26,400 26,291 220.53 2.0339 3.2131 
26,600 26;489 221.13 1.9725 3.1076 
26,800 26,687 221.72 1.9130 3.0059 
27,000 26,886 222.32 1.8555 2.9077 
27,200 27,084 222.91 1.7999 2.8130 
27,400 27,282 223.51 1.7461 2.7217 
27,600 27,481 224.10 1.6940 2.6335 
27,800 27,679 224.70 1.6437 2.5484 
28,000 27,877 225.29 1.5949 + 3 2.4663 - 2 
28,200 28,075 225.89 1.5477 2.3871 
28,400 28,274 226.48 1.5021 2.3106 
28,600 28,472 227.08 1.4579 2.2367 
28,800 28,670 227.67 1.4151 2.1654 
29,000 28,868 228.26 1.3737 2.0966 
29,200 29,066 228.86 1.3336 2.0301 
29,400 29,265 229.45 1.2948 1.9659 
29,600 29,463 230.05 1.2572 1.9039 
29,800 29,661 230.64 1.2208 1.8440 
30,000 29,859 231.24 1.1855 + 3 1.7861 - 2 
30,200 30,057 231.83 1.1514 1.7302 
30,400 30,255 232.43 1.1183 1.6762 
30,600 30,453 233.02 1.0862 1.6240 
30,800 30,651 233.61 1.0552 1.5735 
31,000 30,850 234.21 1.0251 1.5278 
31,200 31,048 234.80 9.9592 + 2 1.4777 
31,400 31,246 235.40 9.6766 1.4321 
31,600 31,444 235.99 9.4028 1.3881 
31,800 31,642 236.59 9.1374 1.3455 
32,000 31,840 237.18 8.8802 + 2 1.3044- 2 
32,200 32,038 237.77 8.6308 1.2646 . 

===== PDF PAGE 568 =====
554 Appendix A 
Altitude 
ho,m h,m Temperatu,e T, K Pressure p, N!m2 Density p, kgtm3 
32,400 32,236 238.78 8.3890 l.2261 
32,600 32,434 238.96 8.1546 l.1889 
32,800 32,632 239.55 7.9273 l.1529 
33,000 32,830 240.15 7.7069 180 
33,200 33,028 240.74 7.4932 l.0844 
33,400 33,225 214.34 7.2859 1.0518 
33,600 33,423 241.93 7.0849 1.0202 
33,800 33,621 242.52 6.8898 9.8972 - 3 
34,000 33,819 243.12 6.7007 + 2 9.6020- 3 
34,200 34,017 243.71 6.5171 9.3162 
34,400 34,215 244.30 6.339, 9.0396 
34,600 34,413 244.90 6.1663 8.7720 
34,800 34,611 245.49 5.9986 8.5128 
35,000 34,808 246.09 5.8359 8.2620 
35,200 35,006 246.68 5.6780 8.0191 
35,400 35,204 247.27 5.5248 7.7839 
35,600 35.402 247.87 5.3760 7.5562 
35,800 35,600 248.46 5.2316 7.3357 
36,000 35,797 249.05 5.09!4 + 2 7.1221 - 3 
36,200 35,995 249.65 4.9553 6.9152 
36,400 36,i93 250.24 4.8232 6.7149 
36,600 36,390 250.83 4.6949 6.5208 
36,800 36,588 251.42 4.5703 6.3328 
37,000 36,786 252.02 4.4493 6.1506 
37,200 36,984 252.61 4.3318 5.9741 
37,400 37,181 253.20 4.2176 5.8030 
37,600 37,379 253.80 4.1067 5.6373 
37,800 37,577 254.39 3.9990 5.4767 
38,000 37,774 254.98 3.8944 + 2 5.3210 - 3 
38,200 37,972 255.58 3.7928 
38,400 38,169 256.17 3.6940 5.0238 
38,600 38,367 256.76 3.5980 4.8820 
38,800 38,565 257.35 3.5048 4.7445 
39,000 38,762 257.95 3.4141 4,6112 
39,200 38,960 258.54 3.3261 4.4819 
39,400 39,157 259.13 3.2405 4.3566 

===== PDF PAGE 569 =====
Standard Atmosphere, SI Units 555 
Altitude 
hG,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kg/m3 
39,600 39,355 259.72 3.1572 4.2350 
39,800 39,552 260.32 3.0764 4.1171 
40,000 39,750 260.91 2.9977 + 2 4.0028 - 3 
40,200 39,947 261.50 2.9213 3.8919 
40,400 40,145 262.09 2.8470 3.7843 
40,600 40,342 262.69 2.7747 3.6799 
40,800 40,540 263.28 2.7044 3.5786 
41,000 40,737 263.87 2.6361 3.4804 
41,200 40,935 264.46 2.5696 3.3850 
41,400 41,132 265.06 2.5050 3.2925 
41,600 41,300 265.65 2.4421 3.2027 
41,800 41,527 266.24 2.3810 3.1156 
42,000 41,724 266.83 2.3215 + 2 3.0310- 3 
42,400 41,922 267.43 2.2636 2.9489 
42,400 42,119 268.02 2.2073 2.8692 
42,600 42,316 268.61 2.1525 2.7918 
42,800 42,514 269.20 2.0992 2.7167 
43,000 42,711 269.79 2.0474 2.6438 
43,200 42,908 270.39 1.9969 2.5730 
43,400 .43,106 270.98 1.9478 2.5042 
43,600 43,303 271.57 1.9000 2.4374 
43,800 43,500 272.16 1.8535 2.3726 
44,000 43,698 272.75 1.8082 + 2 2.3096 - 3 
44,200 43,895 273.34 1.7641 2.2484 
44,400 44,092 273.94 1.7212 2.1889 
44,600 44,289 274.53 1.6794 2.1312 
44,800 44,486 275.12 1.6387 2.0751 
45,000 44,684 275.71 1.5991 2.0206 
45,200 44,881 276.30 1.5606 1.9677 
45,400 45,078 276.89 1.5230 1.9162 
45,600 45,275 277.49 1.4865 1.8662 
45,800 45,472 278.08 1.4508 1.8177 
46,000 45,670 278.67 1.4162 + 2 1.7704 - 3 
46,200 45,867 279.26 1.3824 1.7246 
46,400 46,064 279.85 1.3495 1.6799 
46,600 46,261 280.44 1.3174 1.6366 

===== PDF PAGE 570 =====
556 Appendix A 
Altitude 
ha,m h,m Temperature T, K Pressure p, N/m2 Density p, kg/m3 
46,800 46,458 281.03 1.2862 1.5944 
47,000 46,655 281.63 1.2558 1.5535 
47,200 46,852 282.22 1.2261 1.5136 
47,400 47,049 282.66 1.1973 1.4757 
47,600 47,246 282.66 1.1691 1.4409 
47,800 47,443 282.66 1.1416 1.4070 
48,000 47,640 282.66 1.1147 + 2 1.3739 - 3 
48,200 47,837 282.66 1.0885 1.3416 
48,400 48,034 282.66 1.0629 1.3100 
48,600 48,231 282.66 1.0379 1.2792 
48,800 48,428 282.66 1.0135 1.2491 
49,000 48,625 282.66 9.8961 + 1 1.2197 
49,200 48,822 282.66 9.6633 1.1910 
49,400 49,019 282.66 9.4360 1.1630 
49,600 49,216 282.66 9.2141 1.1357 
49,800 49,413 282.66 8.9974 1.1089 
50,000 49,610 282.66 8.7858 + 1 1.0829 - 3 
50,500 50,102 282.66 8.2783 1.0203 
51,000 50,594 282.66 7.8003 9.6140- 4 
51,500 51,086 282.66 7.3499 9.0589 
52,000 51,578 282.66 6.9256 8.5360 
52,500 52,070 282.66 6.5259 8.0433 
53,000 52,562 282.66 6.1493 7.5791 
53,500 53,053 282.42 5.7944 7.1478 
54,000 53,545 280.21 5.4586 6.7867 
54,500 54,037 277.99 5.1398 6.4412 
55,000 54,528 275.78 4.8373 + 1 6.1108-4 
55,500 55,020 273.57 4.5505 5.7949 
56,000 55,511 271.36 4.2786 5.4931 
56,500 56,002 269.15 4.0210 5.2047 
57,000 56,493 266.94 3.7770 4.9293 
57,500 56,985 264.73 3.5459 4.6664 
58,000 57,476 262.52 3.3273 4.4156 
58,500 57,967 260.31 3:1205 4.1763 
59,000 58,457 258.10 2.9250 3.9482 
59,500 58,948 255.89 2.7403 3.7307 

===== PDF PAGE 571 =====
hG,ft 
-16,500 
-16,000 
-15,500 
-15,000 
-14,500 
-14,000 
-13,500 
-!3,000 
-12,500 
-12,000 
-11,500 
-ll,000 
-10,500 
-!0,000 
-9,500 
-9,000 
-8,500 
-8,000 
-7,500 
-7,000 
-6,500 
-6,000 
-5,500 
appendi.x: 
Standard Atmosphere, English 
Engineering Units 
Altitude 
h,ft Temperatl.me T, 0 R. Pressure p, lb/ft 2 Density p, slugs/ft 3 
-16,513 577.58 3.6588 + 3 3.6905 - 3 
-16,012 575.79 3.6641 3.7074 
-15,512 574.00 3.6048 3.6587 
-15,011 572.22 3.5462 3.6105 
-14,510 570.43 3.4884 3.5628 
-14,009 568.65 3.4314 3.5155 
-l.3,509 566.86 3.3752 3.4688 
-13,008 565.08 3.3197 3.4225 
-12,507 563.29 3.2649 3.3768 
-12,007 561.51 3.2109 3.3314 
-11,506 559.72 3.1576 + 3 3.2866 - 3 
-11,006 557.94 3.1050 3.2422 
-10,505 556.15 3.0532 3.1983 
-10,005 554.37 3.0020 3.1548 
-9,504 552.58 2.9516 3.1118 
-9,004 550.80 2.9018 3.0693 
-8,503 549.01 2.8527 3.0272 
-8,003 547.23 2.8043 2.9855 
-7,503 545.44 2.7566 2.9443 
-7,002 543.66 2.7095 2.9035 
-6,502 541.88 2.6631 + 3 2.8632- 3 
-6,002 540.09 2.6174 2.8233 
-5,501 538.31 2.5722 2.7838 
557 

===== PDF PAGE 572 =====
558 Appendix B 
Altitude 
ha, ft h, ft Temperature T, 0 R Pressure p, _ lb/ft2 Density p, slugs/ft3 
-5,000 -5,001 536.52 2.5277 2.7448 
-4,500 -4,501 534.74 2.4839 2.7061 
-4,000 -4,001 532.96 2.4406 2.6679 
-3,500 -3,501 531.17 2.3980 2.6301 
-3,000 -3,000 529.39 2.3560 2.5927 
-2,500 -2,500 527.60 2.3146 2.5558 
-2,000 -2,000 525.82 2.2737 2.5192 
-1,500 -1,500 524.04 2.2335 + 3 2.4830 - 3 
-1,000 -1,000 522.25 2.1938 2.4473 
-500 -500 520.47 2.1547 2.4119 
0 0 518.69 2.1162 2.3769 
500 500 516.90 2.0783 2.3423 
1,000 1,000 515.12 2.0409 2.3081 
1,500 1,500 513.34 2.0040 2.2743 
2,000 2,000 511.56 1.9677 2.2409 
2,500 2,500 509.77 1.9319 2.2079 
3,000 3,000 507.99 1.8967 2.1752 
3,500 3,499 506.21 1.8619 + 3 2.1429- 3 
4,000 3,999 504.43 1.8277 2.1110 
4,500 4,499 502.64 1.7941 2.0794 
5,000 4,999 500.86 1.7609 2.0482 
5,500 5,499 499.08 1.7282 2.0174 
6,000 5,998 497.30 1.6960 1.9869 
6,500 6,498 495.52 1.6643 1.9567 
7,000 6,998 493.73 1.6331 1.9270 
7,500 7,497 491.95 1.6023 1.8975 
8,000 7,997 490.17 1.5721 1.8685 
8,500 8,497 488.39 1.5423 + 3 1.8397 - 3 
9,000 8,996 486.61 1.5129 1.8113 
9,500 9,496 484.82 1.4840 1.7833 
10,000 9,995 483.04 1.4556 1.7556 
10,500 10,495 481.26 1.4276 1.7282 
11,000 
10,994 479.48 1.4000 1.7011 
11,500 11,494 477.70 1.3729 1.6744 
12,000 11,993 475.92 1.3462 1.6480 
12,500 12,493 474.14 1.3200 1.6219 
13,000 12,992 472.36 1.2941 1.5961 

===== PDF PAGE 573 =====
Standard Atmosphere, English Engineering Units 559 
Aldtude 
hG,ft h, ft Temperature T, 0 R Pressure p, 1blft2 Density p, slugs/n3 
13,500 13,491 470.58 1.2687 + 3 1.5707 - 3 
14,000 13,991 468.80 1.2436 1.5455 
14,500 14,490 467.01 1.2190 1.5207 
15,000 14,989 465.23 1.1948 1.4962 
15,500 15,488 463.45 1.1709 1.4719 
16,000 15,988 461.67 1.1475 1.4480 
16,500 16,487 459.89 1.1244 1.4244 
17,000 16,986 458.11 1.1017 1.4011 
17,500 17,485 456.33 1.0794 1.3781 
18,000 17,984 454.55 1.0575 1.3553 
18,500 18,484 452.77 1.0359 + 3 1.3329 - 3 
19,000 18,983 450.99 1.0147 1.3107 
19,500 19,482 449.21 9.9379 + 2 1.2889 
20,000 19,981 447.43 9.7327 1.2673 
20,500 20,480 445.65 9.5309 1.2459 
21,000 20,979 443.87 9.3326 1.2249 
21,500 21,478 442.09 9.1376 1.2041 ., 
22,000 21,977 440.32 8.9459 1.1836 
22,500 22,476 438.54 8.7576 1.1634 
23,000 22,975 436.76 8.5724 U:4a'S 
23,500 23,474 434.98 8.3905 + 2 1.1238-3 
24,000 23,972 433.20 8.2116 1.1043 
24,500 24,471 431.42 8.0359 l.085:2. 
25,000 24,970 429.64 --1,8633 1.0663 
25,500 25,469 427.86 7.6937 1.0476 
26,000 25,968 426.08 7.5271 1.0292 
26,500 26,466 424.30 7.3634 1.0110 
27,000 26,965 422.53 7.2026 9.9311 -
4 
27,500 27,464 420.75 7.0447 9.7544 
28,000 27,962 418.97 688.96 9.5801 
28,500 28,461 417.19 6.7373 + 2 9.4082- 4 
29,000 28,960 415.41 6.5877 9.2387 
29,500 29,458 413.63 6.4408 9.0716 
30,000 29,957 411.86 6.2966 8.9068 
30,500 30,455 410.08 6.1551 8.7443 
31,000 30,954 408.30 6.0161 8.5841 
31,500 31,452 406.52 5.8797 8.4261 
32,000 31,951 404.75 5.7458 8.2704 

===== PDF PAGE 574 =====
Appendix B 
Altitude 
hi:;, ft h, ft Tempeniture T, 0 R ~Ure p, lb/ft2 Density p, siugs/W 
32,500 32,449 402.97 5.6144 8.1169 
33,000 32,948 401.19 5.4854 7.9656 
33,500 33,446 399.41 5.3589 + 2 7.8165 - 4 
34,000 33,945 397.64 5.2347 7.6696 
34,500 34,443 395.86 5.1129 7.5247 
35,000 34,941 394.08 4.9934 7.3820 
35,500 
35,440 392.30 4.8762 7.2413 
36,000 35,938 390.53 4.7612 7.1028 
36,500 36,436 389.99 4.6486 6.9443 
37,000 
36,934 389.99 4.5386 6.7800 
37,500 37,433 389.99 4.4312 6.6196 
38,000 37,931 389.99 4.3263 6.4629 
38,500 38,429 389.99 4.2240 + 2 6.3100 ~ 4 
39,000 
38,927 389.99 4.l24i 6.1608 
39,500 39,425 389.99 4.0265 6.0150 
40,000 39,923 389.99 3.9312 5.!1127 
40,500 40,422 389.99 3.8382 5.7338 
41,000 40,920 389.99 3.7475 5.5982 
41,500 41,418 389.99 3.6588 5.4658 
42,000 41,916 389.99 3.5723 5.3365 
42,500 42,414 389.99 3.4878 5.2103 
43,000 42,912 389.99 3.4053 5.0871 
43,500 43,409 389.99 3.3248 + 2 4.9668 - 4 
44,000 43,907 389.99 3.2462 4.8493 
44,500 44,405 389.99 3.1694 4.7346 
45,000 44,903 389.99 3.0945 4.6227 
45,500 45,401 389.99 3.0213 4.5134 
46,000 45,899 389.99 2.9499 4.4067 
46,500 46,397 389.99 2.880! 4.3025 
47,000 46,894 389.99 2.8120 4.2008 
47,500 47,392 389.99 2.7456 4.!015 
48,000 47,890 389.99 2.6807 4.0045 
48,500 48,387 389.99 2.2173 + 2 3.9099 - 4 
49,000 48.885 389.99 2.5554 3.8175 
49,500 49,383 389.99 2.4950 3.7272 
50,000 49,880 389.99 2.4~6! 3.6391 
50,500 50,378 389.99 2.3785 3.553! 

===== PDF PAGE 575 =====
Standard Atmosphere, English Engineering Units 56'1 
Aitlrude 
ha, ft 11,ft Temperature T, 0 R Pressure p, lbln2 Density p, siuP"ft3 
51,000 50,876 389.99 2.3223 3.4692 
51,500 51,373 389.99 2.2674 3.3872 
52,000 51,871 389.99 2.2138 3.3072 
52,500 52,368 389.99 2.1615 3.2290 
53,000 52,866 389.99 2.1105 3.1527 
53,500 53,363 289.99 2.0606+ 2 3.0782 J,1-
54,000 53,861 389.99 2.0119 3.0055 
54,500' 54,358 389.99 1.9644 2.9345 
55,000 54,855 389.99 1.9180 2.8652 
55,500 55,353 389.99 1.8727 2.7975 
56,000 
55,850 389.99 l.8284 2.7314 
56,500 56,347 389.99 1.7853 2.6669 
57,000 56,845 389.99 1.7431 2.6039. 
57,500 57,342 389.99 1.7019 2.5424 
58,000 57,839 389.99 1.6617 2.4824 
58,500 
58,336 389.99 1.6225 + 2 2,4238-4 
59,000 58,834 389.99 1.5842 2.3665 
59,500 59,331 389.99 1.5468 2.3107 
60,000 59,828 389.99 1.5103 2.2561 
60,500 60,325 389.99 l.4746 2.2028 
61,000 60,822 389.99 l.4398 2.1508 
61,500 61,319 389.99 1.4058 2.1001 
62,000 61,816 389.99 1.3726 2.0505 
62,500 62,313 389.99 1.3402 2.0021 
63,000 62,810 389.99 1.3086 l.9548 
63,500 63,307 389.99 1.2777 + 2 1.9087 - 4 
64,000 63,804 389.99 1.2475 l.8636 
64,500 64,301 389.99 l.2181 1.8196 
65,000 64,798 389.99 1.1893 1.7767 
65,500 65,295 389.99 l.1613 l.7348 
66,000 65,792 389.99 l.1339 1.6938 
66,500 66,289 389.99 l.1071 1.6539 
67,000 66,785 389.99 l.0810 1.6148 
67,500 67,282 389.99 1.0555 1.5767 
68,000 67,779 389.99 l.0306 1.5395 
68,500 68,276 389.99 l.0063 + 2 i.5032 -. 4 
69,000 68,772 389.99 9,8253 + I 1.4678 

===== PDF PAGE 576 =====
5'2 Appendix B 
Altitude 
ho, ft h, fl; Temperature T, 0 R Pm.sure p, lblft2 Density p, slugs/W 
69,500 69,269 389.99 9.5935 !.4331 
70,000 
69,766 389.99 9.3672 l.3993 
70,500 70,262 389.99 9.1462 l.3663 
71,000 70,759 389.99 8.9305 l.3341 
71,500 
74,256 389.99 8.7199 l.3026 
72,000 71,752 389.99 8.5142 1.2719 
72,500 72,249 389.99 8.3134 l.2419 
73,000 72,745 389.99 8.1174 l.2126 
73,500 73,242 389.99 7.9259 + I l.l840 - 4 
74,000 73,738 389.99 7.7390 1.1561 
74,500 74,235 389.99 7.5566 1.1288 
75,000 74,731 389.99 7.3784 l.l022 
75,500 75,228 389.99 7.2044 l.0762 
76,000 75,724 389.99 7.0346 1.0509 
76,500 76,220 389.99 6.8687 1.0261 
77,000 76,717 389.99 6.7068 1.0019 
77,500 77,213 389.99 6.5487 9.7829- 5 
78,000 77,709 389.99 6.3944 9.5523 
78,500 78,206 389.99 6.2437 + l 9.3".271-5 
79,000 78,702 389.99 6.0965 9.1073 
79,500 79,198 389.99 5.9528 8.8927 
80,000 79,694 389.99 5.8125 8.6831 
80,500 
80,190 389.99 5.6755 8.4785 
81,000 80,687 389.99 5.5418 8.2787 
81,500 81,183 389.99 5.4112 8.0836 
82,000 81,679 389.99 5.5837 7.8931 
82,500 82,175 390.24 5.1592 7.7022 
83,000 82,671 391.06 5.0979 7.5053 
83,500 83,167 391.87 4.9196 + J 7.3139 - 5 
84,000 83,663 392.69 4.8044 7.1277 
84,500 84,159 393.51 4.692! 6.9467 
85,000 84,655 394.32 4.5827 6.7706 
85,500 85,151 395.14 4.4760 6.5994 
86,000 85,647 395.96 4.3721 6.4328 
86,500 86,143 396.77 4.2707 6.2708 
87,000 86,639 397.59 4.1719 6.ll32 
87,500 87,134 398.40 4.0757 5.9598 
88,000 
87,630 399.22 3.9818 5.8106 

===== PDF PAGE 577 =====
Stmdard Atmosphere, Engineering Units 563 
Altitude 
~~~~~~~~-
ha, ft il,i't Temperamre T, 0 R ~urep,IM\ 2 DellSlty p, sll;@i!W 
88,500 88,126 400.04 3.8902 + 1 5.6655 - 5 
89,000 88,622 400.85 3.8010 5.5243 
89,500 89,!18 40U57 3.7140 5.3868 
90,000 89,613 402.48 3.6292 5.2531. 
90,500 90,109 403.30 3.5464 5.1230 
91,000 90,605 404.12 3.4657 4.9963 
91,500 91.100 404.93 3.3870 4.8730 
92,000 91,596 405.75 3.3HJ3 4.7530 
92,500 92,092 406.56 3.2354 4.6362 
93,000 92,587 407.38 3.1624 4.5525 
93,500 93,083 408.!9 3.0912 + l 4.4118- 5 
94,000 93,578 409.01 3.0217 4.3041 
94,500 94,074 409.83 2.9539 4.1992 
95,000 94,569 410.64 2.8878 4.0970 
95,500 95,065 411.46 2.8233 3.9976 
96,000 95,560 412.27 2.7604 3.9007 
96,500 96,056 413.09 2.6989 3.8064 
97,000 96,551 413.90 2.6390 3.7145 
97,500 97,046 414.72 2.5805 3.6251 
98,000 97,542 415.53 2.5234 3.5379 
98,500 98,037 416.35 2.4677 + l 3.4530 - 5 
99,000 98,532 4l7J6 2.4134 3.3704 
99,500 99,028 417.98 2.3603 3,2898 
100,000 99,523 418.79 2.3085 3.2114 
100,500 100,018 419.61 2.2580 3.!350 
!Ol.,000 100,513 420.42 2.2086 3.0605 
101,500 101,008 421.24 2.1604 2.9879 
102,000 101,504 422.05 2.1134 2.9172 
102,500 101,999 422.87 2.0675 2.8484 
103,000 102,494 423.68 2.0226 2.7812 
!03,500 !02,989 424.50 l.9789 + l 2.7158 - 5 
104,000 103.484 425.31 i.9361 2.6520 
104,500 103,979 426.13 l.8944 2.5899 
105,000 104,474 426.94 1.8536 2.5293 
106,000 105,464 428.57 1.7749 2.4128 
107,000 106,454 430.2(} l.6999 2.3050 
108,000 107,444 431.83 1.6282 2.1967 

===== PDF PAGE 578 =====
564 AppendixB 
Altitude 
hG, ft h,ft Temperature T, 0 R Pressure p, 1blft2 Density p, slugstrt3 
109,000 108,433 433.46 1.5599 2.0966 
110,000 109,423 435.09 1.4947 2.0014 
lll,000 110,412 136.72 1.4324 l.9109 
112,000 lll,402 438.35 l.3730 + l 1.8247 - 5 
113,000 112,391 439.97 l.3162 l.7428 
ll4,000 113,380 441.60 l.2620 l.6649 
115,000 ll4,369 443.23 l.2102 l.5907 
116,000 115,358 444.86 l.1607 l.5201 
ll7,000 ll6,347 446.49 l.1134 l.4528 
ll8,000 ll7,336 448.ll l.0682 l.3888 
ll9,000 ll8,325 449.74 l.0250 l.3278 
120,000 119,313 451.37 9.8372 + 0 1.2697 
121,000 120,302 453.00 9.4422 l.2143 
122,000 121,290 454.62 9.0645 + 0 l.1616 - 5 
123,000 122,279 456.25 8.7032 l.l ll3 
124,000 123,267 457.88 8.3575 l.0634 
125,000 124,255 459.50 8.0267 l.0177 
126,000 125,243 46l.l3 7.7102 9.7410- 6 
127,000 126,231 462.75 7.4072 9.3253 
128,000 127,219 464:38 7.1172 8.9288 
129,000 128,207 466.01 6.8395 8.5505 
130,000 129,195 467.63 6.5735 8.1894 
131,000 130,182 469.26 6.3188 7.8449 
132,000 131,170 470.88 6.0748 + 0 7.5159 - 6 
133,000 132,157 472.51 5.84ll 7.2019 
134,000 133,145 474.13 5.6171 6.9020 
135,000 134,132 475.76 5.4025 6.6156 
136,000 135,199 477.38 5.1967 6.3420 
137,000 136,106 479.01 4.9995 6.0806 
138,000 137,093 480.63 4.8104 5.8309 
139,000 138,080 482.26 4.6291 5.5922 
140,000 139,066 483.88 4.4552 5.3640 
141,000 140,053 485.50 4.2884 5.1460 
142,000 141,040 487.13 4.1284 + 0 4.9374- 6 
143,000 142,026 488.75 3.9749 4.7380 
144,000 143,013 490.38 3.8276 4.5473 
145,000 143,999 492.00 3.6862 4.3649 

===== PDF PAGE 579 =====
Standard Atmosphere, English Engineering Units 565 
Altitude 
ha, ft h, ft Temperature T, 0 R Pressure p, lb/rt2 Density p, slugs/rt3 
146,000 144,985 493.62 3.5505 4.1904 
147,000 145,971 495.24 3.4202 4.0234 
148,000 146,957 496.87 3.2951 3.8636 
149,000 147,943 498.49 3.1750 3.7106 
150,000 148,929 500.11 3.0597 3.5642 
151,000 149,915 501.74 2.9489 3.4241 
152,000 150,900 503.36 2.8424 + 0 3.2898- 6 
153,000 151,886 504.98 2.7402 3.1613 
154,000 152,871 506.60 2.6419 3.0382 
155,000 153,856 508.22 2.5475 2.9202 
156,000 154,842 508.79 2.4566 2.8130 
157,000 155,827 508.79 2.3691 2.7127 
158,000 156,812 508.79 2.2846 2.6160 
159,000 157,797 508.79 2.2032 2.5228 
160,000 158,782 508.79 2.1247 2.4329 
161,000 159,797 508.79 2.0490 2.3462 

===== PDF PAGE 580 =====


===== PDF PAGE 581 =====
ANSWERS TO SELECTED PROBLEMS 
2.2 L = 529.2 N, D = 5.788 N 
2,4 Cmac = -0.0415 
2.6 CL = 0.261 
2.8 (a) ci = 0.0605; (b) CL = 0.0536; (c) CL = 0.061 
2.10 L/ D-+ oo 
2.12 C D.O = 0.0105 
3.2 PA = 513 hp 
J.4 0.223 h 
3.6 Pes = 5,163 hp 
5.2 (a) Ymax = 467.3 ft/s; (b) Vmax = 461.1 ft/s 
5.4 (~) = 11/4 
D max (M~ - 1)- .jcd,j 
(M 2 - l)l/4 ~ OI V ~d,f 
ot=------2 
5.6 Vstall = 103.4 ft/s 
S.9 (R/C)max = 33.65 ft/s; V(R/c)""" = 284.2 ft/s; 8max = 8.05°; Ve""" = 193 ft/s 
5.11 emin = 4.03°; dmax = 26.9 mi; V(L/D)max = 225.7 ft/sat 10,000 ft; 
V(L/D)max = 194 ft/sat sea level 
5.13 30,422 ft 
5.15 Rmax = 820 mi; V<Ct/Cv)- = 297.l ft/s 
S.17 1,112 mi 
5.19 Vmax = 857.8 ft/sat sea level, Vmax = 911.1 ft/sat 30,000 ft 
5.22 (R/C)m11J1. = 85.23 ft/sat sea level, (R/C)nw.x = 26.8 ftls at 30,000 ft 
6,1 Rmin = 538 ft; Wmax = 24.52 deg/s 
6.3 286.7 ft/s 
6.5 47,839 ft 
6.7 Total takeoff distance= 2,033 ft 

===== PDF PAGE 582 =====


===== PDF PAGE 583 =====
REFERENCES 
1. Peter L. Jakab, Visions of a Flying Machine; The 12. EE. C. Culick and H. R. Jex, "Aerodynamics, 
Wright Brothers and the Process of Invention, Stability and Control of the 1903 Wright Flyer," 
Smithsonian Press, Washington, 1990. in The Wright Flyer: An Engineering 
2. John D. Anderson, Jr., "Faster and Higher; The Perspective, edited by Howard S .. Wolko, 
Quest for Speed and Altitude," in Milestones of National Air and Space Museum, Washington, 
Aviation, National Air and Space Museum, 1987, pp. 19--43. 
Smithsonian Institution, edited by John T. 13. Laurence K. Loftin, Quest for Performance: The 
Greenwood, produced by Hugh Lauter Levin Evolution of Modem Aircraft, NASA SP-468, 
Associates, Inc., New York, distributed by Washington, 1985. 
Macmillan Publishing Company, New York, 14. R. Miller, and D. Sawers, The Technical 
1989, pp. 80-146. Development of Modem Aviation, Praeger 
3. John D. Anderson, Jr., Introduction to Flight, 3rd Publishers, New York, 1970. 
ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989. 15. James R. Hansen, "Bigger: the Quest for Size," in 
4. John D. Anderson, Jr., "Sir George Cayley," in Milestones of Aviation, National Air and Space 
Great Lives from History: British and Museum, Smithsonian Institution, edited by John 
Commonwealth Series,. Salem Press, 1987. T. Greenwood, produced by Hugh Lauter Levin 
5. C.H. Gibbs-Smith, Sir George Cayley's 
Associates, Inc., New York, distributed by 
Aeronautics, 1796-1855, Her Majesty's 
Macmillan, New York, 1989, pp. 150-221. 
Stationery Office, London, 1962. 16. John D. Anderson, Jr., Fundamentals of 
6. J. Lawrence Pritchard, Sir George Cayley: The 
Aerodynamics, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1991. 
Inventor of the Airplane, Max Parrish and 
17. S. F. Hoerner, Fluid Dynamic Drag, Hoerner Fluid Company, London, 1961. 
Dynamics, Brick Town, NJ, 1965. 
7. Charles H. Gibbs-Smith, Aviation: An Historical 
Survey from Its Origins to the End of World War 18. S. F. Hoerner, and H. V. Borst, Fluid Dynamic Lift, 
II, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, Hoerner Fluid Dynamics, Brick Town, NJ, 1975. 
1970. 19. Ira H. Abbott, and Albert E. Von Doenhoff, Theory 
8. John D. Anderson, Jr., A History of Aerodynamics of Wings Sections, McGraw-Hill, New York, 
and Its Impact on Flying Machines, Cambridge 1949; also, Dover edition, New York, 1959. 
University Press, New York, 1997. 20. David A. Lednicer and Ian Gilchrist, Jr., "A 
9. John D. Anderson, Jr., "The Wright Brothers: The Retrospective: Computational Aerodynamic 
Analysis Methods Applied to the P-51 Mustang," First True Aeronautical Engineers," in The AIAA Paper 91-3288-CP, in the Proceedings of Wright Flyer: An Engineering Perspective, the A/AA 9th Applied Aerodynamics Conference, edited by Howard S. Wolko, National Air and September 23-25, 1991, pp. 688-700. Space Museum, Washington, 1987, pp. 1-17. 
21. John D. Anderson, Jr., Computational Fluid 
10. Tom D. Crouch, A Dream of Wings, Norton, New Dynamics: The Basics with Applications, 
York, 1981. McGra-Hill, New York, 1995. 
11. Tom D. Crouch, The Bishop's Boys, Norton, New 22. Joseph Katz and Allen Plotkin, Low-Speed 
York, 1989. Aerodynamics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991. 
569 

===== PDF PAGE 584 =====
570 Roferences 
23. H.B. Helmbold, "Der unverwundene Ellipsenflugel 35. Egbert Torenbeck, Synthesis of Subsonic Airplane 
als tragendi Flache," J 1942 DL I, I, 1942 Design, Delft University Press, Delft, Holland, 
(German Wartime Report). 1982. 
24. Dietrich Kuchemann, The Aerodynamic Design of 36. John W.R. Taylor, ed., Jane's All the World's 
Aircraft, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1978. Aircraft, 80th ed., Jane's Information Group 
25. Daniel P. Raymer, Aircraft Design: A Conceptual Limited, Coulsdon, England, 1989-1990. 
Approach, 2nd ed., AIAA Education Series, 37. E. P. Hartman and David Biermann, "The 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Aerodynamic Characteristics of Full-Scale 
Astronautics, Washington, 1992. Propellers Having 2, 3 and 4 Blades of Clark Y 
26. John J. Bertin and Michael L. Smith, Aerodynamics and R.A.F. 6 Airfoil Sections," NACA TR 640, 
for Engineers, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood November 1937. 
Cliffs, NJ, 1989. 38. C. C. Carter, Simple Aerodynamics and the 
27. Charles E. Jobe, "Prediction and Verification of Airplane, 5th ed., Ronald Press, New York, 1940. 
Aerodynamic Drag, Part I: Prediction," in Thrust 39. John D. Anderson, Jr., Computational Fluid 
and Drag: Its Prediction and Verification, edited Dynamics: The Basics with Applications, 
by Eugene Covert, Progress in Astronautics and McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995. 
Aeronautics Series, vol. 98, American Institute of 
Walter J. Hesse and Nicholas V. S. Mumford, Jr., Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington, 1985. 40. 
Jet Propulsion for Aerospace Applications, 2nd 
28. L. T. Goodmanson and L. B. Gratzer, "Recent ed., Pitman Publishing Corp., New York, 1964. 
Advances in Aerodynamics for Transport 
Aircraft," Aeronautics and Astronautics, vol. 11, 41. W. Austyn Mair and David L. Birdsall, Aircraft 
no. 12, December 1973, pp. 30--45. Performance, Cambridge University Press, 
29. R. T. Whitcomb and J. R. Clark, "An Airfoil Shape 
Cambridge, England, 1992. 
for Efficient Flight at Supercritical Mach 42. John D. Anderson, Jr., Modem Compressible Flow: 
Numbers;' NASA TMX-1109, July 1965. With Historical Perspective, 2nd ed., 
30. John D. Anderson, Hypersonic and High 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1990. 
Temperature Gas Dynamics, McGraw-Hill, New 43. J. D. Mattingly, W. H. Heiser, and G. H. Daley, 
York, 1989. Aircraft Engine Design, American Institute of 
31. Otto Lilienthal, Der Vogelplug als Grundlage der Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington, 1987. 
Fliegekunst, R. Gaertners Verlagsbuchhandlung, 44. H. I. H. Saravanamuttoo, "Modem Turboprop 
Berlin, 1889. Engines," Progress in Aerospace Sciences, vol. 
32. Gustave Eiffel, The Resistance of the Air and 24, 1987,pp.225-248. 
Aviation: Experiments Conducted at the 45. Nguyen X. Vinh, Flight Mechanics of High-
Champ-de-Mars Laboratory, Dunot and Pinat, Performance Aircraft, Cambridge University 
Paris, 1910; English translation by Jerome C. Press, Cambridge, England, 1993. 
Hunsaker, comprising the 2nd ed. (revised and 46. W. Sears, "On Projectiles of Minimum Wave Drag," enlarged), Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1913. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, vol. 4, no. 4, 
33. P. G. Hill and C. R. Peterson, Mechanics and January 1947, pp. 361-366. 
Thermodynamics of Propulsion, 47. A. E. Winkelmann and J.B. Barlow, "Flowfield Addision-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1965. Model for a Rectangular Planform Wing beyond 
34. Jack D. Mattingly, Aircraft Propulsion, Stall,"AIAA Journal, vol. 18, no. 8, August 1980, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995. pp. 1006-1008. 

===== PDF PAGE 585 =====
48. D. J. Peake and M. Tobak, "Three-Dimensional 
Flows about Simple Components at Angle of 
Attack," High Angle-of-Attack Aerodynamics, 
AGARD!VKI Lecture Series No. 121, von 
Karman Institute, Brussels, Belgium, March 
1982. 
49. Francis, J. Hale, Introduction to Aircraft 
Selection and Design, Wiley, New 
York, 1984. 
50. Barnes W. McCormick, Aerodynamics, 
Aeronautics, and Mechanics, V/iley, New 
York, 1979. 
51. B. H. Carson, "Fuel Efficiency of Small Aircraft," 
AIAA Paper No. 80-1847, American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington, 1980. 
52. Leland M. Nicoli, Fundamentals of Aircraft 
Design, published by the author and distributed 
by METS, Inc., San Jose, CA, 1975. 
53. Jan Roskam, Airplane Design, Roskam Aviation 
and Engineering Corp., Ottawa, KS, 1985. 
54. Darrol, Stinton, The Design of the Airplane, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1983. 
55. Gerald Coming, Supersonic and Subsonic Airplane 
Design, self-published, College Park, MD, 1970. 
56. N. Currey, Aircraft Landing Gear Design: 
Principles and Practices, American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington, 1988. 
57. H. Conway, Landing Gear Design, Chapman and 
Hall, London, 1958. 
58. Ma..rvin W. McFarland, ed., The Papers of Wilbur 
and Orville Wright, vol. 1, McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1953. 
59. Donald W. Douglas, "The Developments and 
Reliability of the Modern Multi-Engine Air Liner 
with Special Reference to Multi-Engine 
Airplanes after Failure," The 
Aeronautical Journal, vol. 39, November 1935, 
pp. 1010-1042; also in Journal 
A.eronautical Sciences, vol. 2, no. 4, 1935, 
pp. 128-52. 
60. "Recollections of Dougl!!s 
" Journal Aviation 
Historical Sbciety, Summer 1987, pp. U0-25. 
References 
61. D. J. Ingells, The Plane that Changed the World, 
Aero Publishers, Fallbrook, CA, 1966. 
62. Ronald Miller and David Sawers, The Technical 
Development of Modem Aviation, Praeger 
Publishers, New York, 1970. 
63. William H. Cook, The Road to the 707, TYC 
Publishing Company, Bellevue, WA, 1991. 
64. J.E. Steiner, G. M. Bowes, F. G. Maxam, S. 
571 
Wallick, and M. C. Gregoire, Case Study in 
Aircraft Design: The Boeing 727, AIAA 
Professional Study Series, American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington, 
September 1978. 
65. J.E. Steiner, "Jet Aviation Development A 
Company Perspective," in The Jet Age, edited by 
Walter J. Boyne and Donald S. Lopez, 
Smithsonian Press, Washington, 1979, pp. 
141-83. 
66. l K. Buckner, D. B. Benepe, and P. W. Hill, 
"Aerodynamic Design Evolution of the YF-16," 
AIAA Paper No. 74-935, American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Washington, 1974. 
67. Clarence L. Johnson and Maggie Smith, Kelly, 
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, 1985. 
68. Ben R. Rich, and Leo Janos, Skunk Works, Little, 
Brown, Boston, 1994. 
69. Clarence L. Johnson, "Some Development Aspects 
of the YF-12A Interceptor Aircraft," AIAA Paper 
No. 69-757, American Institute of Aeronautics · 
and Astronautics, Washington, 1969. 
70. Ben R. Rich, "The F-12 Series Aircraft 
Aerodynamic and Thermodynamic Design in 
Retrospect," AIAA Paper No. 73-820, American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 
Washington, 1973. 
71. Richard Abrams and Jay Miller, Lockheed (General 
F-22, Aerofox, Inc., 
Arlington, TX, 1992. 

===== PDF PAGE 586 =====
---

===== PDF PAGE 587 =====
A 
Absolute ceiling, 287, 288 
Accelerated climb, see Rate of climb 
Acceleration time ration, 523 
Advance ratio, 156 
Adverse pressure gradient, 430 
Aerodromes, 12, 14 
Aerodynamic center 
calculation of, 70-72, 445 
definition, 66 
Aerodynamic coefficients, 57, 62-70 
Aerospace plane, 48 
Afterbuming, 183-184 
Airfoil 
CLARK-Y,25 
laminar flow, 33, 77,406 
nomenclature, 73-77 
supercritical, 116, 119-122 
on Wright Flyer, 17 
Airframe-propulsion 517 
AH-moving 535 
Area rule, 38, 116-119, 524-525 
Aspect ratio; see also Wings 
definition of, 78 
effects of, 110 
Atmosphere; see standard atmosphere 
Baggage compartment, 433 
Balanced field length; see Takeoff 
Ban.le angle, 193, 325, 326 
Beacham, T. E., 27 
Bell Aircraft 
P39,384-385 
X-1, 37,382 
Biplane, 334 
INDEX 
Blackbird; see Lockheed SF-71 
Blair, Morgan, 321 
Blended wing-body, 524 
Boeing 
489-494,495,515 
Model 247, 484 
Model707, 494-500 
Mode1727,500-515 
Model 747, 41 
Model 515 
Mode1777,3,4,6,515 
Boulton, E W., 19 
Boundary layer, 32 
Brequet range equation, 295, 403 
Burton, Ed, 467 
Busemann, Adolf, 36 
C 
Cabin cross sections, 506 
Caldwell, Frank, 27 
Camber, 74 
Carson's speed, 301-302 
Cayley, George, 7-9 
Center-of-gravity, 433-435 
Center of pressure, 55 
Cessna model 172, 3, 4 
Chanute, Octave, 145 
Chines, 530 
73, 74 
Clark, 25 
CLARK-Y airfoil; see Airfoil 
see Rate of climb 
Climb angle, 193, 270 
Comet; see de HaviHand Comet 
Concorde, 42, 43 
Compressibility corrections, 
Concentrated force, 55, 56 
513 
82 

===== PDF PAGE 588 =====
574 Index 
Conceptual design, 382-383, 387-395 
Configuration layout, 391, 448 
Constant speed propeller; see 
Constraint diagram, 392-395 
Convair F-102, 38, 39 
Cook, William H., 487 
Corner velocity, 343 
Cowling; see NACA cowling 
Cruciform tail, 436 
Curtiss, Glenn, 19 
Curtiss R3C-2, 22 
D 
d' Alembert's paradox, 107 
Dark Star, 544 
DC-3; see Douglas DC-3 
de Havilland Comet, 38, 40, 495-497, 
499-500 
Delta wings; see Wings 
Design lift coefficient; see Lift 
Detail design, 386 
Displacement, 153 
Doolittle, Jimmy, 22 
Douglas, Donald W., 397,463,469,474 
Douglas DC-3, 30, 111,431, 463-486 
Downwash, 80 
Drag 
ai:ifoils, l 06-109 
angle of attack variation, 63, 66 
breakdown, 115, 126 
bucket, 76 
coefficient, 58 
cooling, 114 
definition of, 53 
diagram, 54 
divergence, 244--252 
due to lift, 114, 207 
external store, 114 
finite wings, 109-112 
flap, 114 
friction, 113 
fuselage, 113--115 
Drag-Cont. 
general discussion of, 9, 105-106 
induced, 109, 112, 1 129 
inte:iference, 113 
laminar, 107, 125 
landing gear, 114 
leakage, 114 
Mach number variation of, 67 
parasite, 1 129 
pressure, 106, 107, 113 
profile, 107, 113 
protuberance, 114 
Reynolds number variation of, 63, 65 
supersonic, 122-124 
transonic, 115-116 
trim, 114 
turbulent, 108, 125 
vortex, 112 
Drag bucket; see Drag 
Drag divergence; see Drag 
Drag polar, 11, 126-141, 204 
Du Temple, Felix, 9 
Dynamically similar flows, 59 
Dynamic pressure, 58 
E 
Earhart, Amelia, 26 
Eiffel, Gustave, 18,131, 137, 139-141 
Eiffel-type wind tunnel, 141 
Elliptical lift distribution, 424 
Endurance 
general discussion, 302-305, 
306-307 
jet airplanes, 305 
propeller-driven airplanes, 303-304 
Energy height, 345, 346 

===== PDF PAGE 589 =====
Equations of motion, 191-198, 201 
Equivalent shaft power; see Turboprop 
engine 
Exhaust nozzles, 540 
F 
F4; see McDonnell-Douglas 
F-22; see Lockheed 
F-102; see Convair 
Fl04; see Lockheed 
Farrnan,Henri,20,29 
Fillet, 430-431 
Flaps; see High-lift devices 
Fokker 
D. vn, 19 
trimotor, 466 
Ford trimotor, 484 
Fowler flaps; see High-lift devices 
Frye,Jack,463,464,466,469 
Fuel tank, 432 
G 
GALCIT, 479 
Geometric twist, 423 
Glide angle, 282 
Glider, 12 
Gliding flight, 282-287 
Global Hawk, 544 
Gloster, E. 28/39, 35 
Gold Bug, 20 
Gross weight; see Weight 
Ground effect, 357 
Ground roll 
landing, 367, 370-374 
takeoff, 353, 355-363 
Ground speed, 310 
Grumman F6F, 334 
Hansen, fames, 41 
Harrier, 44 
Harte, Richard, 19 
He 178, 35, 488 
Head resistance, 18 
Heinke!, Ernst, 35, 488 
Hele-Shaw, H. S., 27 
Helmbold's equation, 86 
Henson, William S., 9 
High-lift devices 
Index 
flaps,28,29,257,499,502-506,514 
Fowler flap, 30-32, 258, 259, 502 
Kruger flap, 258, 503, 504 
leading edge flap, 29, 258, 504 
leading edge slat, 29, 257, 
258, 504 
slats, 28, 257-263, 505 
slots, 28 
slotted flaps, 29, 258, 503 
split flap, 29, 30, 257, 
258, 482 
High-octane fuel, 28 
Hypersonic airplane, 48 
J 
Jacobs, Eastman, 36 
Jewett, Bob, 490 
Johnson, Clarence (Kelly), 487,527, 
528,537 
Jones, R. T., 36 
June Bug, 19, 20 
K 
Kindelberger, James H., 34,466 
Kuchemann, Dietrich, 91, 101, 321 
L 
Lachman, G. V., 29-30 
Laminar flow airfoil; see Airfoil 
Landing 
approach distance, 368-369, 410 
constraint, 394 
flare distance, 370, 411 
575 

===== PDF PAGE 590 =====
576 Index 
Landing-Cont. 
general discussion, 367-374 
ground roll, 367, 370-374,.410, 411 
Landing gear, 422-447, 498 
Langley, Samuel P., 12-15 
Leading edge, 7 4 
Levelturn,322-336,394 
Lift 
angle of attack variation, 63 
Cayley's lift-drag diagram, 8 
coefficient definition, 58 
definition, 53 
delta wing, 99-102 
design lift coefficient, 76 
diagram, 54 
finite wing, 78-80 
high-aspect-ratio wing, 80-83 
low-aspect-ratio wing, 85-88 
Mach number variation, 67, 68 
maximum lift coefficient, 64, 254, 
406-410 
swept wing, 90-97 
vortex lift, 100 
Lift slope, 62 
Lift-to-dragratio, 17, 18,105,214,282, 
391,403,493,529 
Lifting line theory, 80, 109 
Lifting surface theory, 85, 91 
Liftoff speed; see Takeoff 
Lilienthal, Otto, 11-12, 137-139, 191, 
255 
Limit load factor, 341 
Lindbergh, Charles, 199,466,469 
Lippisch, Alexander, 37, 38 
Load factor, 324, 325-329, 341 
Lockheed 
C-5, 41 
C-141, 134 
F-16,336,519-526 
F-22,6,335,538-541 
F-80, 517,518 
F-104, 37, 88 
Fl 17, 45, 46, 527 
L-14 Super Electra, 31 
P-38, 34 
Lockheed-Cont. 
SR-71, 527-538 
U-2, 111, 254 
Vega,26,32, 111,484 
Lockheed-Martin; see Lockl1eed 
Mach number 
critical, 68, 119 
definition of, 58 
drag-divergence, 69, 119 
Mader, 30 
Maneuver point, 343 
Manley, Charles, 13-14 
Martin, Glenn L., 31, 199 
Mass flow, 148 
Maxim, Sir Hiram, 9-11 
Maximum coefficient ratios, 218-223 
Maximum lift coefficient; see Lift 
Maximum velocity, 230,231, 242-244, 
247,251 
McDonell- Douglas 
F4, 135 
Fl5, 136 
Mean aerodynamic chord, 427, 439 
M~an camber line, 73 
Mean effective pressure, 153 
Messerschmitt, Me262, 35 
Mission profile, 401 
Mission segment weight fraction, 402 
Moments 
coefficient, 58 
about leading edge, 53 
about quarter-chord, 53 
Monoplane, 334 
Mozhaisld, Alexander, 9 
N 
NACA cowling, 25-27, 32,482 
National Advisory Committee for 
Aeronautics (NACA), 25, 73 

===== PDF PAGE 591 =====
National. Physical Laboratory, 30 
Neutral point, 434, 444, 531 
Nieuport, 19 
Nieuport monoplane (1910), 20 
Normal force coefficient, 93 
North American 
F-86,36,37,334 
P-51, 33,334 
Northrop alpha, 468,484 
Northrop,Jack,30,44,467 
Northrop, T-38, l 203 
0 
Optimization, 392 
Omithopter, 7 
Oswald, W. Bailey, 479-480 
Oswald efficiency factor, 415, 480 
Otto, Nikolaus, 151 
p 
P-38; see Lockheed 
P-47; see Repµblic P-47 
P-51; see North American 
Page, Sir Frederick Handley, 29 
Panelcodes,85,91 
Pitch angle, 157 
Pitts Special, 334 
Planform, 60 
Post, Wiley, 26, 32 
Power 
altitude variation, 155 
available, 149, 239-241, 454 
required, 234--238, 454 
velocity vai."iation, 154 
Power leading, 418, 453 
Prandtl, Ludwig, 29, 32, 64 
Prandtl-Glauert rule, 82 
Preliminai.7 design, 383 
Pressure distribution, 52 
Pressurization, 32 
Index 
Propeller 
constan.t speed, 28, 160-161 
efficiency, 16, 156, 158, 159, 227, 
228,240,403 
feathered, 162 
general discussion, 156--162 
size, 440-442 
tip speed, 442 
variable-pitch, 17, 27, 160, 403, 482 
Wright brothers' design, 16 
Propulsive efficiency, 149-150 
Pull-down, 337-338, 339-341 
Pull-up,336-337,339-341 
Pusher configuration, 421 
Q 
Quarter-chord 
definition, 53 
moments about, 53 
Radar cross section, 45 
Range 
effect of wind, 309-313 
general discussion, 293- 302, 
308-309,493,510 
jet propelled airplanes, 297-299 
propeller-driven airplanes, 296--297, 
455 
Rate of climb 
accelerated, 344--352 
equation, 266 
maximum climb angle, 272 
maximum value, 269,276,278,281 
unaccelerated, 265-28 l., 455 
Rate of descent, 285, 286 
Raymond, Arthur, 467,469,478 
Reaction principle, 147 
Reciprocating engine; see Engines 
Reheat, 184 
57'1 

===== PDF PAGE 592 =====
578 Index 
Relative wind, 53 
Remotely piloted vehicles, 47 
Republic 
P-47, 34 
F-84, 517,518 
Requirements for design, 388-389, 
398,501 
Resultant aerodynamic force, 8, 52, 132 
Reynolds number, 58, 109 
Rich, Ben, 528 
Rolling resistance, 355, 358 
Royal Aeronautical Society, 474 
Royal Aircraft Establishment, 73 
Royal Aircraft Factory, 29 
s 
Schneider Trophy races, 22 
Sear-Haack body drag, 248 
Separated flow, 64 
Service ceiling, 287, 288 
Seversky XP-41, 115 
Shaft brake power, 153 
Shear stress, 52 
Shute, Neville, 381 
Sink rate, 285-287 
Skunk Works, 487,527 
Slats; see High-lift devices 
Slots; see High-liftdevices 
Smith, Cyrus R., 481 
Snow, C. P., 381 
Solution space, 394 
Sopwith Camel, 19 
SPAD XIII, 19, 21 
Specific excess power, 347-351 
Specific fuel consumption 
altitude variation, 155 
definition of, 154 
thrust, 164 
thrust/power equivalence, 185 
velocity variation, 155 
Specifications; see Requirements for 
design 
Spike inlet, 536--538 
Spoilers,498,499,503,504 
Stall,64,255-256,329,511 
Stall velocity, 254,456,501 
Standard atmosphere, 545-565 
Static margin, 444, 530 
Static performance, 200 
Stealth, 45, 46 
Steiner, John, 513, 514 
Stineman, Fred, 467 
Stringfellow, John, 9 
Subsonic leading edge, 36, 92, 93 
Supercharger, 32, 155, 418 
Supersonic leading edge, 36, 92, 93 
Surface temperature, 535 
Sweep angle, 422 
Swept wing; see Wings 
T 
Tail, 435-440 
Tail volume ratios, 436 
Takeoff 
airborne distance to clear obstacle, 
363-364 
balanced field length, 355 
constraint, 393 
critical speed, 354 
general discussion, 353-355, 534 
ground roll, 353, 355-363 
lift-off speed, 355 
minimum control speed, 354 
minimum unstick speed, 355 
Taper ratio, 92, 423, 425 
Thrust 
available, 226--232 
equation, 148,164 
general nature, 146--151 
required, 202-216 
Thrust specific fuel consumption; 
see Specific fuel consumption 
Thrust-to-weight ratio, 9, 213, 216, 
391,412-418 

===== PDF PAGE 593 =====
Time to climb, 290-293, 350, 351-352 
Tire size, 44 7 
Tower jumpers, 7 
Townend ring, 25 
Tractor configuration, 421, 517 
Trailing edge, 74 
Transition Reynolds number, 109 
T-tail, 436, 507, 508 
Tupolev Tu-144, 42 
Turbofan engine 
general discussion, 170-178 
thrust specific fuel consumption, 
176--177 
thrust variation, 174-176,229 
Turbojet engine 
general discussion, 162-170 
power available, 241 
thrust buildup, 163 
thrust equation, 164 
thrust specific fuel consumption, 
164,166,168,169,170 
thrust variation, 166--167, 169, 229 
Turboprop engine 
equivalent shaft power, 180, 240 
general discussion, 178-183 
power variation, 181-182 
thrust specific fuel consumption, 
180, 181-182 
Turn radius, 323, 325, 329-331, 339, 
341, 521 
Turn rate, 323, 325, 332-333, 340, 341, 
523 
u 
UAV; see Uninhabited air vehicle 
Ultimate load factor, 341 
Uninhabited air vehicle, 47, 544 
V 
Velocity instability, 208 
Index 
Vertical takeoff and landing; see VTOL 
V-n diagram, 341-344 
Volta Conference, 36 
von Kannan, Theodore, 36 
von Ohain, Hans, 35, 145 
Vortex drag; see Drag 
Vortex lift; see Lift 
Vortices, 79 
Voyager, 47 
VTOL, 43, 335 
w 
Wash-in, 422 
Washout, 422 
Wave drag; see Drag 
Weight 
crew, 398, 405 
empty, 398, 399-400, 516,520 
fuel, 398, 400--405 
gross, 293, 399, 405-406 
payload, 398, 405 
start combat, 522 
Weight estimate, 389, 391, 398-406, 
449-453 
Weight fraction; see Mission segment 
weight fraction 
Wells, Ed, 490 
Wenham, Francis, 17 
Wetted surface area, 113, 127, 450-451 
Whitcomb, Richard, 38, 116, 119 
Whittle, Sir Frank, 35 
Wind tunnel tests, 479, 481 
Wings 
delta, 99-102 
high, 428-429 
high aspect ratio, 80-85 
low, 429-430 
low aspect ratio, 37, 85-88 
mid,429 
swept,36,90-97,490,506,515 
Wing-body combinations, 103-104 
Wing loading, 28, 218, 391, 410-412, 
453 
519 

===== PDF PAGE 594 =====
580 Index 
Wright brothers, 5, 15-19, 34,137,255, 
390,458-463 
Wright Flyer, 5, 6, 15-19, 139-140, 
146,336,422,458-463 
X 
X-1; see Bell Aircraft 
X-30, 48 
y 
Yeager, Charles E., 37 

===== PDF PAGE 595 =====


===== PDF PAGE 596 =====
mance 
and design 
This exciting new book provides readers with a unique, integrated approach to aircraft 
performance and design. Intended as a text for the first course in airplane performance, 
Dr. Anderson's coverage of design philosophy and methodology conveys how working 
engineers achieve performance standards. 
Part I of the book provides the needed background material, including overviews of 
aerodynamics and propulsion, and historical information. Part II deals with static and 
accelerated aircraft performance and equations of motion, with both graphical and 
analytical solution techniques. "Design Cameos" are included in the first two parts to 
emphasize the role and importance of engineering design techniques. Part III covers 
design methodologies, illustrated by historical examples throughout, and can be used 
for the first part of a senior design course. · 
As with Dr. Anderson's other bestselling books in aeronautical engineering, 
AIRCRAFT, PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN is notable for its clear, engaging writing 
style, practical examples and outstanding homework problems . 
Related titles of interest include: 
* Anderson, Introduction to Flight, 6/e 
* Borman & Ragland, Combustion Engineering 
* Nelson, Flight Stability and Automatic Control, 2/ e 
* Hyer, Stress Analysis of Fiber-Reinforced Composite Materials 
* Budynas, Advanced Strength and Applied Stress Analysis, 2/e 
* Wiesel, Spaceflight Dynamics, 2/e 
* Oosthuizen & Carscallen, Compressible Fluid Flow 
The McGrow ·Hill Companies -
II Higher Education 
t 
Visit us at: www.tatamcgrawhill.com 
ISBN-13: 978~0-07-070245-5 
ISBN-10: 0-07-070245-4 
9 780070 702455 